G 10 ee 1 9

 

Office of the City Manager
CONSENT CALENDAR
September 15, 2015

To: Honorable Mayor and Members of the City Council
From: Awl, Dee Williams-Ridley, Interim City Manager
Submitted by: David Abel, Acting Director, Human Resources

Subject: Memorandum of Understanding: Berkeley Police Association

RECOMMENDATION

Adopt two Resolutions: 1) approving a new three (3) year Memorandum of
Understanding (hereafter referred to as “MOU”) with the Berkeley Police Association
(hereafter referred to as the “Union”) with a term of July 6, 2014 through June 30, 2017
and authorizing the City Manager to execute and implement the terms and conditions of
employment set forth in the new MOU; and 2) approving a new salary resolution for
Representation Units E and F that implement the new salary levels negotiated in the
new labor agreement and rescinding Resolution No. 63,961-N.S.

FISCAL IMPACTS OF RECOMMENDATION

Based on the terms of the economic settlement, there is no cost in the first year of the
contract, with a cumulative cost of living adjustment of two percent (2%) over three (3)
years. The cumulative total cost is approximately $2.4 million over the term of the
agreement (Fiscal Year 2015 to Fiscal Year 2017). The funding for this agreement
comes from the general fund and other funding sources. The cost of this labor contract
will be included in the fiscal years 2016 and 2017 Budgets.

There are several provisions in the new MOU that result in controlling City costs, both
with respect to near term costs and to reduction of long term liabilities. Most notably,
the continuation of cost sharing by existing and new members as defined under the
Public Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA). This is estimated to save
approximately $594,824 for the term of the contract. Additionally, the MOU also freezes
the medical cash-in-lieu amount.

Moreover, the MOU provides a mental health crisis intervention pay (Hazard Premium
Pay) of one percent (1%) effective upon Council approval of the new MOU; and one
percent (1%) effective January 2016. A portion of the January 2016 differential is offset
by employees contributing 1% of the employer contribution to CalPERS.

2180 Milvia Street, Berkeley, CA 94704 e Tel: (510) 981-7000 e TDD: (510) 981-6903 e Fax: (510) 981-7099
E-Mail: manager@CityofBerkeley.info Website: http://www.CityofBerkeley.info/Manager

 
Memorandum of Understanding: Berkeley Police Association CONSENT CALENDAR
September 15, 2015

CURRENT SITUATION AND ITS EFFECTS

The City’s labor contract with the Union expired and was fully terminated as of July 5,
2014. In an effort to reach agreement on a successor MOU, representatives of the City
and representatives of the Union held approximately 35 negotiating sessions beginning
in May 6, 2014. The parties reached a settlement agreement on all outstanding
economic and non-economic issues on June 25, 2015.

While the labor contract expired and fully terminated on July 5, 2014, the laws
governing collective bargaining agreements provide that the terms and conditions set
forth in the expired contract remain in full force and effect until modified through the
collective bargaining process. The collective bargaining process has now been
completed and the parties have reached tentative agreement on all outstanding issues.
On July 15, 2015, the Union notified the City that the membership had ratified the
tentative agreement by a vote 97% approval.

BACKGROUND
There are approximately 175 employees represented by the Union in two (2)
representational units (Units E and F).

The City’s philosophy during negotiations with the Union was to follow City Council
policies to protect the City’s short and long-range economic health. City Council
policies for labor negotiations include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Assure that labor organizations and their members are treated fairly and with
respect.

2. Negotiate in good faith and within the process established by the parties
including honoring the traditional confidentiality of the negotiation process.

3. Negotiate contracts based on a “Total Compensation Package” model (changes
in current and future salary, and health and welfare benefits) within the City’s
overall financial conditions.

4. Any Equity Adjustments to base salary must be included in the overall Total
Compensation Package. Council policy has been to establish salary ranges at
the median of comparable jurisdictions.

5. Assure that the City’s Total Compensation salary and benefit package is
competitive in the marketplace, is fair to existing employees, and is competitive
with public employees in the Bay Area so that the City is able to recruit and retain
quality candidates, particularly in critical classifications.

6. Negotiation of employee benefits should include consideration of uniformity

across bargaining units to the extent this is compatible with state law, enhances
transparency and is efficient to administer, while at the same time, not resulting

Page 2
Memorandum of Understanding: Berkeley Police Association CONSENT CALENDAR
September 15, 2015

in an overall increase in costs. Consideration of uniform benefits will not be
utilized as a peremptory tool to negotiate compensation or benefits as such
would be contrary to the spirit and intent of bargaining in good faith.

7. Include sustainability of benefits as part of negotiating considerations.

Major provisions of the new labor contract are as follows:

 

Section 10 (Term) 7/6/14 to 6/30/17

 

Section 11 (Salaries) 1% 7/1/16; 1% 1/1/17

 

. Intermediate: 1% 9/27/15 (from current 2% to 3%); 1%
Section 13.7 (POST) 1/1/16 (3% to 4%); 1% 7/1/16 (4% to 5%).

 

Section 24.6.3.2 (Catastrophic Can be used for birth/adoption of child and after exhausting

 

 

 

Sick Leave Use) all accrued leave.

Section 31.1 (Health Insurance .

Meet & Confer) Agree to meet during term.

Section 31.4 (Life) Increase to $100,000 10/1/15.
he) 31.6 (Medical Cash in| Frozen at $560.72 effective 9/15/15.

 

Added appeal deadline of 10-days and Union to pay State

Section 40.3 (Grievance) Mediation & Conciliation Services fee.

 

Section 13.5 (Hazard Premium 1% 9/15/15; 1% 1/3/16 (Cumulative total of 2%)
Pay — Crisis Intervention Team)

CalPERS 1/3/16 1% CalPERS all employees cost-share to employer
contribution rate.

 

 

Section 56.8 and 56.9 (CalPERS | 7/1/16 additional 1% (total of 2%) CalPERS employee cost-
Contribution) share to employer contribution rate.

 

 

Crisis Intervention Team

As noted above, under the new MOU, sworn personnel will receive Hazard Premium
Pay (Crisis Interventional Team) pay of one percent (1%) effective September 15, 2015
and an additional one percent (1%) effective January 2016 (for a cumulative total of two
percent (2%)) in recognition of the special hazards associated with responding to
mental health related law enforcement situations. Sworn personnel must complete a
specialized training/educational program on how to respond to and deal with the
mentally ill. The training program, for which certification of completion is provided,
enhances the ability of the City’s sworn personnel to perform their duties, including
reducing the need for arrests, preventing potentially violent situations from escalating,
improving the ability of sworn personnel to identify and address the sometimes complex
actual needs of the mentally ill, and reducing the risks and dangers to sworn personnel
and citizens associated with responding to mental health related disputes.

Page 3

 
Memorandum of Understanding: Berkeley Police Association CONSENT CALENDAR
September 15, 2015

CalPERS

The parties have also reached tentative agreement that employees pay one percent
(1%) of the employers’ CalPERS contribution effective January 2016, and an additional
one percent (1%) for a total of two percent (2%) of the employers’ CalPERS contribution
on an ongoing permanent basis. This will apply to all employees represented by the
Union regardless of the date of hire.

ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
There are no identifiable environmental effects or opportunities associated with the
subject of this report.

RATIONALE FOR RECOMMENDATION

Representatives of the City worked within policies set by the City Council for guiding
contract negotiations and staff met with the City Council in closed session to discuss
and receive the policy direction and economic authority to settle this contract. The
overall settlement must be within the City’s ability to pay based on projected revenue as
well as demands for services across the spectrum of programs the City provides the
community. | believe this settlement is in keeping with City Council’s direction to staff
and is fair and equitable to the members of the Union.

ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS CONSIDERED
None

CONTACT PERSON
Margarita Zamora, Acting Employee Relations Manager, Human Resources, 981-6821

Attachments:
1: Resolution: Memorandum of Understanding: Berkeley Police Association
Exhibit A: Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Berkeley and
Berkeley Police Association
2: Resolution: Approving a New Classification and Salary Resolution for the Berkeley
Police Association and Rescinding Resolution No. 63,961-N.S.
Exhibit A: Berkeley Police Association Classification/Salary Resolution Period:
July 1, 2016 through December 31, 2016
Exhibit B: Berkeley Police Association Classification/Salary Resolution Period:
January 1, 2017 through June 30, 2017

Page 4
RESOLUTION NO. ##,###-N.S.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING: BERKELEY POLICE ASSOCIATION

WHEREAS, the City is obligated under the provisions of California Government Code
Section 3500 — 3510, commonly referred to as the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, to meet
and confer in good faith and attempt to reach agreement with representatives of
recognized bargaining units on matters within the scope of representation including, but
not limited to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment; and

WHEREAS, representatives of the City and the Berkeley Police Association have met
and conferred in good faith and have reached agreement on a new Memorandum of
Understanding that incorporates all changes and modifications in wages, hours and
other terms and conditions of employment agreed to by the parties.

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Council of the City of Berkeley that the
City Manager is hereby authorized to execute the new Memorandum of Understanding
for the period July 6, 2014 through June 30, 2017 with the Berkeley Police Association,
including changes in certain benefits on dates specified in the Memorandum of
Understanding which is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked Exhibit A.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Manager is hereby authorized to execute
and implement said Memorandum of Understanding including all changes in wages,
hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. A fully executed original of said
contract is filed in the Office of the City Clerk.

Exhibits
A: Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Berkeley and the
Berkeley Police.
cel ais

 

Exhibit A

 

Memorandum of Understanding
between
City of Berkeley
and

Berkeley Police Association

July 6, 2014 to June 30, 2017
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

ARTICLE 1
ADMINISTRATION

SECTION 1: RECITALS

This Memorandum of Understanding, (hereinafter referred to as “Understanding”) is entered into
pursuant to the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (Government Code, sections 3500 - 3511), as amended,
and has been jointly prepared by the parties.

The City Manager is the representative of the City of Berkeley in employer-employee relations as
provided in Resolution No. 43,397-N.S., adopted by the City Council on October 14, 1969.

The Berkeley Police Association (hereinafter referred to as "the Association") is the recognized
employee organization for Representation Unit E (sworn, managerial employees in the Police
Department) and Representation Unit F (sworn, non-managerial employees in the Police
Department), which organization has been certified as such pursuant to said Resolution No.
43,397-N.S. The employee positions in such Representation Units are hereinafter set forth in
Exhibit A, and the Association is recognized as the sole representative of employees assigned to
such positions.

The parties have met and conferred in good faith regarding wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of employment of the employees in said Representation Units E and F, have freely
exchanged information, opinions, and proposals, and have endeavored to reach agreement on all
matters relating to the employment conditions and employer-employee relations of such
employees.

This Understanding shall be presented to the City Council as the joint recommendation of the
undersigned.

SECTION 2: RECOGNIZED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION

2.1. The Association is the majority representative of all employees within Representation Units
E and F and shall continue to be recognized as such unless, in accordance with the
provisions of Resolution No. 43,397-N.S. or as said Resolution may be amended, the
Association is no longer certified as the recognized employee organization for employees in
Representation Units E and F.

2.2 Responsibility for management of the City and direction of its work force is vested in City
officials and the City Manager whose powers and duties are specified by law. In order to
fulfill this responsibility, it is the exclusive right of City management to determine the mission
of its constituent departments, set standards of service to be offered to the public and
exercise control and discretion over the City's organization and operations. It is also the
exclusive right of the City Manager to take disciplinary action for just cause, to implement a
layoff pursuant to Section 57 of this Understanding, determine the methods, means and
personnel by which the City's operations are to be conducted and to take all necessary
actions to maintain uninterrupted service to the community and carry out the City's mission
in emergencies; provided, however, the Association shall be notified of any proposed

Page 1
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

changes affecting wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment of
employees represented by the Association, and the City Manager shall, upon request, meet
and confer with representatives of the Association and endeavor to reach agreement on the
practical consequences of any such changes in wages, hours and other terms and
conditions of employees represented by the Association except as otherwise provided in
this Understanding.

SECTION 3: NO DISCRIMINATION

3.1

3.2

The Association certifies that it has no restriction on membership based on race, color,
creed, ethnicity, ancestry, religion, age, gender, sexual orientation, marital or domestic
partner status, gender identify or gender expression, parental status, pregnancy, national
origin, political affiliation, disability or medical condition, Acquired Immune Deficiency
(AIDS/HIV) or AIDS related condition, or any other status protected by applicable state or
federal law. The Association agrees that it will support programs for making members of
minority groups and women aware of employment opportunities within the City, and that it
will work with the City to increase recruitment efforts of such minorities and women into City
service. The Association recognizes and supports the City's commitment to equal
employment opportunity.

Neither the City nor the Association shall discriminate against any employee covered by this
Understanding in a manner which would violate any applicable laws because of race, creed,
color, religion, political affiliation, sexual orientation, sex, national origin, disability, or age
(including AIDS.) The City and the Association agree that no employee shall be
discriminated against on the basis of membership or non-membership in the Association or
any lawful activity on behalf of the Association.

SECTION 4: ASSOCIATION SECURITY

41

4.2

All employees who are, or hereafter voluntarily choose to become, members of the
Association shall maintain such membership in good standing as a condition of continued
employment for the duration of this Understanding; provided, however, that withdrawal from
membership shall be allowed during the month which precedes the month in which this
Understanding expires. Employees may withdraw by sending written notice of withdrawal to
the Association (with a copy to the Director of Human Resources of the City) during the
withdrawal period.

The Association shall indemnify and save the City harmless from any and all claims,
demands, suits, or any other action arising from Section 4 or from complying with any
request for termination of employment under Section 4. The Association will not undertake
to compensate the City for any time which may be spent by the City Attorney or anyone on
the staff of the City Attorney in preparing for or defending any legal action which may be
filed. The Association will, however, pay directly any fine or reimburse the City for the
payment of any fine which may be assessed against the City by virtue of its agreement to
Sections 4.1 and 4.2, and the Association will pay any judgment or award, including the

Page 2
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

43

4.4

payment of any wages lost by an employee whose services are temporarily or permanently
terminated because of his or her failure to comply with the provision of Section 4.

It is understood and agreed that the City Council retains the right, in its sole discretion, to
determine that the Association is not discriminating against any employee or class of
employees. It is further understood and agreed that the City Council retains the right to
withdraw the Association security privilege if at any time it determines that the Association is
discriminating against any individual or classifications prohibited by Section 3 of this
Understanding.

The City shall furnish the Association, on a monthly basis, the name, date of hire, salary,
classification, and work location of all newly hired employees subject to the Understanding.
The City shall furnish newly hired employees with information concerning the Association as
supplied by the Association.

SECTION 5: DEDUCTION OF ASSOCIATION DUES

5.1

5.2

The City shall deduct, once monthly, the amount of the Association's regular and periodic
dues, service fees, or insurance premiums as may be specified by the Association under
the authority of an authorization card furnished by the Association and signed by the
employee. Such deductions, together with a written statement of the names and amounts
deducted, shall be forwarded promptly to the Association office.

Upon receipt of a notice from the Association of an increase in the amount of regular and
periodic dues, service fees, or insurance premiums, an employee may, within thirty (30)
days, revoke the deduction authorization by furnishing written notice of such revocation to
the Department of Human Resources. An employee may also revoke the deduction
authorization by furnishing written notice of such revocation during the thirty (30) day period
immediately preceding the expiration of this Understanding.

SECTION 6: ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVES

6.1

6.2

The City shall allow representatives of the Association, subject to the conditions set forth in
Sections 6.2 and 6.3, reasonable time off from work without loss of compensation or other
benefits to represent its members in disputes which involve the interpretation or application
of those rules, regulations, and resolutions which have been or may hereafter be adopted
by the City Council to govern personnel practices and working conditions, including such
rules, regulations, and resolutions asmay be adopted by the City Council to effect
Memoranda of Understanding which may result from the meeting and conferring process,
and to represent its members in meeting and conferring in good faith for amendments to
this Understanding in the future.

Representatives: With respect to the meet-and-confer process, four (4) Association
representatives shall be the maximum number who will be allowed concurrent time off. In
all other cases, such as disputes defined in Section 6.1, the maximum number allowed
concurrent time off shall be two (2).

Page 3
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

6.3

6.4

6.5

6.6

6.7

Notice Requirements: Association representatives seeking time off to carry out functions
described in Section 6.1 shall advise their supervisors at the earliest possible time and,
except in emergency cases, no later than 24 hours in advance before leaving their work
assignments. The Department will not unreasonably deny release time to the Association
President (or Acting President) so that he or she may schedule the duties specified in
Section 6.1; there may be times, however, when the City will, on short notice, need to
modify or adjust such release time because of unpredictable service needs.

6.3.1 In emergency situations which require the immediate attention of said employee, the
employee shall notify a supervisor upon his or her return to work. It is understood
that employees will not leave their work assignments without the approval of the
supervisor and that such approval shall not be unreasonably denied.

6.3.2 To the extent possible, the Association will attempt to schedule all release time to
avoid impacting service levels. If necessary, however, Association representatives’
workloads will be adjusted on the basis of approved release time. Employees shall
record release time for activities described in Section 6.1 with the appropriate code
on their time sheets and cards.

Meetings: Reasonable release time will be available so that members can attend periodic
meetings of the Association which occur during their shift.

Bulletin Boards: The City shall provide bulletin board space for Association use at each of
its work centers where covered employees are regularly employed.

Board of Review: All time spent in attendance at Board of Review meetings and Police
Review Commission meetings, interviews, and hearings as an official representative of the
Association by appointed Association officers shall be considered time worked, and shall be
compensated in accordance with Section 19 of this MOU. The compensable time outside
of an employee’s regularly schedule shall be limited to one person.

Up to three (3) officers designated by the Board of Directors of the Association may meet
with the City Manager and Chief of Police every second month to foster communication.
These meetings will be scheduled so that Association representatives can attend during
regular work hours. Association representatives will record time spent in such meetings as
work (rather than release) time.

SECTION 7: ASSOCIATION RELEASE TIME

The Association will be entitled to up to six hundred (600) hours of paid leave of absence each
calendar year to be granted collectively to employees who are designated representatives of the
Association to attend seminars, conferences, or conventions away from the job site, where
employees are not available to respond to emergencies. The Chief may, in his or her discretion,
approve additional Association requests. The Chief or the Chief's designee may not deny such
requests solely on the need to post overtime. Time spent on such Association business will be
recorded with the appropriate code on time sheets.

Page 4
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

SECTION 8: SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS

In the event that any provision of this Understanding is declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be illegal or un-enforceable, that provision of this Understanding shall be null and
void, but such nullification shall not affect any other provisions of this Understanding, all of which
other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 9: FINALITY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

9.1. This Understanding sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the
matters set forth herein, and any and all prior and existing Understanding, understandings,
or agreements, whether formal or informal, are hereby superseded and terminated in their
entirety. This Understanding cannot be modified except in writing upon the mutual consent
of the parties and ratification by the City Council.

9.2 Existing provisions and/or benefits provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council or
as provided in the Municipal Code and which are referred to in the Understanding shall be
provided in accordance with the terms of the Understanding.

9.3. There is no guarantee that working conditions and practices will be continued if they are not
included in this Understanding or if they have not been or are not hereafter specifically
authorized by ordinance or by a resolution of the City Council.

9.4 It is the intent of the parties that ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations enacted
pursuant to this Understanding shall be administered and observed in good faith.

9.5 Although nothing in this Understanding shall preclude the parties from mutually agreeing to
meet-and-confer on any subject within the scope of representation during the term of this
Understanding, it is understood and agreed that neither party may require the other to meet-
and-confer on any subject matter covered herein or with respect to any presentation during
the term of this Understanding.

9.6 Amendments to this Understanding shall be effective only when adopted by the City Council
and ratified by the Association.

SECTION 10: DURATION

The term of this Understanding shall commence when the terms and conditions set forth herein
have been adopted by resolution by the City Council but in no event shall this Understanding be
effective prior to 0001 hours July 6, 2014. Those provisions which have been assigned effective
dates herein will become effective on those dates. This Understanding and all its rights,
obligations, terms and provisions shall expire and otherwise be fully terminated at 2400 hours June
30, 2017.

Page 5
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

ARTICLE 2
SALARIES, HOURS OF WORK AND COMPENSATION ISSUES

SECTION 11: SALARIES

144

11.3

Salaries are set according to the classifications and salary ranges assigned to those
classifications and with the effective dates listed in Exhibit “A” to this MOU and attached
hereto. These salary ranges reflect a 1% salary increase effective July 1, 2016 anda
further 1% salary increase effective January 1, 2017.

Effective July 12, 1998, the salary ranges for the classifications of Police Captain and Police
Lieutenant were adjusted in recognition for performance of the duties of the Duty Command
Officer. This section is not intended to prohibit a Police Lieutenant from receiving overtime
compensation or any other special compensation earned while serving as a Duty Command
Officer.

Employees occupying a position in the competitive service shall be paid a salary or wage
within the range established for that position's class as set forth in Exhibit “A”. The minimum
rate for the class shall apply to employees upon original appointment to the position except
in cases of lateral entry. Lateral entry shall be provided for Police Officer only, and the Chief
of Police, with the approval of the Director of Human Resources and City Manager, may pay
to lateral entrants a salary above the first step. Employees reinstated or reemployed after
layoff shall receive a rate within the range established for the class. Transfers shall not
affect an employee's salary rate. Employees appointed to any of the positions set forth in
Exhibit “A” and employed or working on a part-time basis shall be paid in proportion to the
time worked and described in their appointment.

No salary advancement shall be made so as to exceed the maximum rate established for
the class to which the advanced employee's position is allocated. Advancement shall be in
accordance with the compensation plan of the City and shall depend upon increased
service value of an employee to the City as exemplified by recommendations of the
department head, performance record, special training, length of service, and other
pertinent evidence.

11.3.1 An employee's salary step increase as provided in Section 12 (Salary Advancement)
shall not be affected by any leave of absence without pay if the employee is off the
payroll for less than one hundred sixty (160) consecutive hours. If the employee is
off the payroll for one hundred sixty (160) consecutive hours or more, the total
amount of time off shall be made up before the employee shall be entitled to such
salary step increase.

Salary reductions may be made as a result of an employee's diminished service value or as
part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages as an economy measure or as part of a
general curtailment program. No reduction shall be made below the minimum rate
established for the class to which the reduced employee's position is allocated. Notice of
the reduction shall be given to the employee not later than two (2) weeks prior to the
effective date of the reduction. Any employee whose salary has been reduced shall be
entitled to receive a written statement of the reasons for such action.

Page 6
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

11.4.1 Salary reductions which are part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages as
an economy measure or as part of a general curtailment program shall not be
subject to the provisions of Sections 11.4, 11.5 or 56.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11.5 Y Rate: Any employee occupying a position which is reallocated to a class, the maximum
salary for which is less than the incumbent's present salary, or occupying a position in a
class, the salary rate or range for which is reduced, shall continue to receive his or her
present salary. Such salary shall be designated as a "Y" rate. When an employee ona "Y"
rate vacates his or her position, subsequent appointments to that position shall be made in
accordance with Section 11.2.

11.6 Pay Periods: Payment of salaries herein established shall be bi-weekly. Each pay period
shall begin at 12:01 a.m. Sunday up to and including 12:00 midnight Saturday two weeks
following. Each payment shall be made not later than the Friday following the ending of
each payroll period and shall include payment for all earnings during the previous payroll
period.

11.7 For purposes of calculating pay and benefits, the end of the year shall be defined as the last
day of the last full pay period of the calendar year.

SECTION 12: SALARY ADVANCEMENT

12.1 Effective July 7, 2002, employees in the classification of Police Officer will be placed in the
salary step according to the schedule on the chart below. Increases between salary steps
shall occur on the employee's anniversary date. The period of time necessary to move from
one salary step to the next is expressed in months on the chart below:

Length of Service — Police Officer Salary Step
0 to completion of 12 months Step A
Beginning of 13" month to completion of 24" month Step B
Beginning of 25" month to completion of 36" month Step C
Beginning of 37" month to completion of 48"" month Step D
Beginning of 49" month to completion of 60" month Step E
Beginning of 615 month to completion of 72" month Step F
Beginning of 734 month and beyond Step G
12.2 Effective July 7, 2002, employees in the classifications of Police Sergeant, Police Lieutenant

and Police Captain will be placed in the salary step according to the schedule on the chart
below. Increases between salary steps shall occur on the employee's anniversary date.
The period of time necessary to move from one salary step to the next is expressed in
months on the chart below:

 

 

 

 

Length of Service — All Ranks Above Police Officer Salary Step
Beginning of 25" month to completion of 36" month Step A
Beginning of 37" month to completion of 48" month Step B

 

 

 

Page 7
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
Beginning of 49°" month to completion of 60!" month Step C
Beginning of 61S' month to completion of 72"4 month Step D
Beginning of 73" month and beyond Step E

12.3 Upon promotion, the employee shall be placed at the step of the higher rank that is

12.4

commensurate with the employee’s length of service in any classifications represented by
the Association.

Lateral Entry Step Placement: An employee appointed through lateral entry may be
appointed at either a salary step or longevity range level commensurate with his or her
experience as a sworn peace officer.

SECTION 13: PREMIUM/SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT

13.1

13.2

13.3

13.4

13.5

Explosives Ordinance Technician: An employee assigned as an Explosives Ordinance
Technician shall receive double his or her regular straight-time rate for that time spent (from
call to completion) in dealing with explosives. Said double time shall be the total
compensation for such time spent, whether on regular duty time or when called in from off-
duty. If an employee is assigned as an Explosive Ordinance Technician while on regular
duty and not while on overtime, those hours worked as an Explosive Ordinance Technician
on regular duty shall be reported to CalPERS as Hazard Premium Pay.

Special Response Team (S.R.T): An employee assigned as a member of the Special
Response Team (S.R.T.) shall receive a five percent (5%) salary differential when involved
in an active S.R.T. incident. If an employee is assigned as a member of the Barricaded
Subjects Hostage Negotiation Team while on regular duty and not while on overtime, those
hours worked as a S.R.T. member on regular duty shall be reported to CalPERS as Hazard
Premium Pay.

Supervisor Special Assignment: When a Police Sergeant is assigned to function as the
Field Training Officer Supervisor, he or she shall receive a five percent (5%) salary
differential while occupying that position. If an employee is assigned as the Field Training
Officer Supervisor, while on regular duty and not while on overtime, this differential for hours
worked on regular duty shall be reported to CalPERS as Supervisor Special Assignment
Pay.

Field Training Officer Special Assignment: Employees assigned as Field Training
Officers shall receive a ten percent (10%) differential during any calendar year when
actually working as a Field Training Officer. If an employee is assigned as a Field Training
Officer while on regular duty and not while on overtime, this differential for hours worked on
regular duty shall be reported to CalPERS as Supervisor Special Assignment Pay.

Hazard Premium Pay:
Mental Health Crisis Intervention Pay: The City of Berkeley (City) and Berkeley Police

Association (Association) agree that the parties may agree under this MOU provision that
the City will provide Hazardous Premium Pay for particular hazardous duties and

Page 8
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

13.6

13.7

activities. At present, the City and Association have agreed that, effective the first full pay
period after Council approval of this MOU, all sworn employees shall receive a Hazard
Premium Pay called Mental Health Crisis Intervention Pay equal to 1.0% of base salary,
which pay shall be provided on all hours the employee is in a paid status. This pay shall
be in recognition of the fact that the City's sworn personnel are routinely and consistently
exposed to uniquely hazardous conditions arising from law enforcement interactions with
the mentally ill and are required to complete training intended to enhance sworn
personnel's ability to perform the hazardous and specialized mental health related law
enforcement duties which Berkeley's sworn personnel are consistently and routinely
asked to perform, including arrests, potential arrests and addressing other mental health
related disputes. Effective the first full pay period of January 2016, the amount of pay
shall increase to 2.0% of base salary.

Homicide Detail: A Police Sergeant assigned to the Homicide Detail shall receive a four
percent (4%) salary differential. If a Police Sergeant is assigned to the Homicide Detail
while on regular duty and not while on overtime, this differential for hours worked on regular
duty shall be reported to CalPERS as Detective Division Special Assignment Pay. A Police
Officer assigned to the Homicide Detail shall receive a three percent (3%) salary differential.
If a Police Officer is assigned to the Homicide Detail while on regular duty and not while on
overtime, this differential for hours worked on regular duty shall be reported to CalPERS as
Detective Division Special Assignment Pay.

Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST): In addition to the salary set forth in the
Exhibit “A” of this MOU, employees covered by this MOU who qualify under regulations
promulgated by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training shall
receive the following educational/training incentive compensation. To receive the
Intermediate Certificate and/or Advanced Certificate differential pay below, employees
must submit documents required by the Berkeley Police Department Professional
Standards Division verifying POST eligibility, including but not limited to copies of college
transcripts, proof of a college degree and other related forms. Failure of the employee to
submit documents required by the Professional Standards Division shall delay the POST
incentive pay eligibility until such time as the employee provides all required
documentation.

13.7.1 Intermediate Certificate: Within thirty (30) working days of approval from the
Berkeley Police Department Professional Standards Division of an Officers’
eligibility for a Peace Officers Standards and Training Intermediate Certificate, the
employee shall receive a two percent (2%) differential to base salary and such
payment shall be reported to CalPERS as Peace Officers Standards and Training
Certificate Pay as a form of Educational Pay. Effective the first full pay period
following Council approval of this MOU, this Intermediate POST Certificate
differential shall increase to three percent (3%) of base salary. Effective January
1, 2016, this Intermediate POST Certificate differential shall increase to four
percent (4%) of base salary. Effective July 1, 2016, this Intermediate POST
Certificate differential shall increase to five percent (5%) of base salary.

13.7.2 Advanced Certificate: Within thirty (30) working days of approval from the
Berkeley Police Department Professional Standards Division of an Officers’

 

Page 9
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

eligibility for a Peace Officers Standards and Training Advanced Certificate, the
employee shall receive a two percent (2%) differential to base salary and such
payment shall be reported to CalPERS as Peace Officers Standards and Training
Certificate Pay as a form of Educational Pay.

13.7.3An employee may simultaneously receive the Intermediate and Advanced
Certificate differential for a total differential of four percent (4%), five percent (5%)
following Council approval of this MOU, six percent (6%) effective January 1,
2016, and seven percent (7%) effective July 1, 2016.

SECTION 14: BILINGUAL PREMIUM PAY

The Chief of Police may make a Bilingual Premium Pay Special Assignment of an employee who
is able to demonstrate verbal communication skills in a language other than English, including
Braille and sign language, and who routinely and consistently utilizes these bilingual skills for the
City of Berkeley. Candidates for the Bilingual Premium Pay Special Assignment will be selected in
a manner similar to the manner used to select Field Training Officers. The employee must agree
to use the bilingual skill during his or her normal work shift regardless of assignment. The Bilingual
Premium Pay shall be a five percent (5%) to base pay, shall apply to all hours in a paid status and
shall be reported to CalPERS as Bilingual Premium Special Assignment Pay.

SECTION 15: LONGEVITY PAY

Effective June 28, 2009, employees completing nineteen (19) years of service in a classification
represented by the Association shall receive a five percent (5%) differential beginning with the
anniversary date of beginning the twentieth (20'") year of service and shall apply to all hours in a
paid status. This Longevity Pay shall be reported to CalPERS as Longevity Pay Incentive Pay.

SECTION 16: SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT INCOME PROGRAM

Effective December 25, 1988, the City will pay two percent (2%) of the employee's regular annual
salary for the first $32,400 in salary, into a Supplemental Retirement Income Program.

SECTION 17: HIGHER CLASS PAY, TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS, PROVISIONAL
APPOINTMENTS

17.1 Acting Assignment: When an employee occupying a position in any of the classifications
covered by this Memorandum of Understanding is specifically assigned by the Chief of
Police or his or her authorized representative to temporarily serve in a higher classification
for a minimum of one (1) entire shift (either 8, 10 or 12.5 hours depending on the
employee's shift schedule), said employee shall be paid at the lowest step of the higher
classification which provides at least a five (5) percent differential or the lowest step of the
higher classification to which the employee is assigned, whichever is greater. To be eligible
for a higher class assignment the employee must meet the minimum qualifications, as

Page 10
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

outlined in the class description, and perform the duties of the higher classification. In no
case, however, will an employee acting in a higher classification be paid in excess of the top
step of the salary range of the higher class. In no instance shall an acting assignment last
for more than thirty (30) consecutive days; any assignment over thirty (30) consecutive days
shall be deemed a provisional assignment.

17.2 Temporary Vacancy: When a temporary vacancy is to be filled in a classification for which
there is an existing eligibility list, the City shall attempt to make the temporary assignment
from that list.

17.3 Provisional Appointment: An employee who holds a provisional appointment in a
classification shall receive step increases in such classification as if the employee held a
permanent appointment thereto.

17.4 Duration: Temporary and provisional assignments may be made up to six (6) months in
any calendar year.

SECTION 18: HOURS AND DAYS OF WORK

18.1 Subject to the terms of this MOU, hours and days of work shall be governed by rules

established by the City Manager and the Chief of Police. The work schedule is attached as
Exhibit “B” for illustrative purposes and is described as follows:

18.1.1 4/10 Work Schedule: Employees assigned to the 4/10 Work Schedule shall be
assigned to begin work on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.
Employees assigned to this Work Schedule shall have a normal work week of four
(4) consecutive ten (10) hour days. Scheduled days off shall be Friday, Saturday
and Sunday.

18.1.2 3/12.5 Work Schedule: Employees assigned to the 3/12.5 Work Schedule shall be
assigned to begin work on Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Employees assigned to
this Work Schedule shall have a normal work week of three (3) consecutive twelve
and one-half (12.5) hour days. Scheduled days off shall be Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday. Employees assigned to this Work Schedule shall also
work one additional ten (10) hour shift on either the first, second or third Thursday of
each Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) 28 consecutive day work period depending
on the Team Assignment of the employee.

18.1.3 Either party may request to modify the work schedule after initial implementation and
any modification shall be subject to the meet and confer process.

18.1.4 There may be some special assignments including, but not limited to Sergeants
assigned to the Internal Affairs Bureau or the Sergeant assigned to the Professional
Standards Division who work a 4/10 schedule from Tuesday through Friday with
scheduled days off on Saturday, Sunday and Monday.

Page 11
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

18.2

18.3

18.1.5 When an employee’s schedule is changed from the 3/12.5 to the 4/10 schedule, the
employee shall be given the option of working the additional four (4) hours or taking
earned vacation or compensatory time to cover the pay period shortage.

18.1.6 Daylight Savings Time

18.1.6.1 Spring: In the Spring when transitioning to Daylight Savings Time
(DST), employees working during the one (1) hour transition from
Standard Time to DST will be paid only for actual hours worked.
Employees working on a shift which includes the one (1) hour
transition may be granted an option by the Chief to work an additional
hour or use compensatory time, floating holiday, or vacation to make
up the lost work hour.

18.1.6.2 Fall: In the Fall when transitioning from DST, employees working
during the one (1) hour transition will be paid for all hours worked
including overtime and one-and-one-half (11) times the straight-time
rate of pay for hours worked in excess of the regular workweek as set
forth in either Section 18.1.1 or 18.1.2 of this Understanding, or all
hours worked in excess of 171 hours in a 28 consecutive day work
period as provided in Section 207(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA).

Shift Trades: The practice of trading of work shifts (where one Unit F employee trades a
shift with another of the same rank) shall be limited as set forth in Police Department
General Orders which include the following provisions:

18.2.1 Each Unit F employee shall be allowed no more than four (4) trades of shifts in any
calendar month. Employees desiring in excess of four (4) trades of shifts must first
seek and receive permission for additional trades of shifts from the Commanding
Officer of the division involved.

18.2.2 Notwithstanding the foregoing, under no circumstances will employees be allowed to
regularly or systematically trade shifts with one another in a manner that negates or
converts the hours or days any employee is regularly scheduled to work (e.g., to
work a four [4] day work week on a regular basis).

18.2.3 Permission for additional trades of shifts shall generally be granted if the request is
supported by a bona fide reason and the request will not circumvent the
requirements of Section 18.2.2 above.

18.2.4 In no event shall compensatory time off be transferred to compensate for a trade of
shift by one employee for another.

Lunch Period: Employees may, upon clearance by the on-duty supervisor, extend their
lunch period by no more than thirty (30) minutes in order to work out. Employees availing
themselves of this opportunity will limit their workout within the Berkeley City limits and
remain available and reachable by telephone during the entire period in the event of a

Page 12
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

specific need. As is the case with any lunch period, the needs of the City and Department
take precedence.

SECTION 19: OVERTIME/SHIFT EXTENSION

19.1

19.2

19.3

Employees of the rank of Lieutenant or below shall be entitled to receive overtime pay. No
employee may work overtime or extend his or her shift without express prior approval of his
or her supervisor. Time spent in a paid status but not actually worked (i.e., sick leave,
vacation leave, workers’ compensation, holiday time when receiving pay, when being
represented, or other approved leaves with pay) shall be considered "time worked" for the
purposes of this section. Unless specifically requested by a commanding officer,
employees shall not work overtime on their regularly scheduled shift on days they would
normally work. On days when they have taken paid time off for any reason other than
workers’ compensation, they are not automatically restricted from working overtime during
those same days on shifts other than their own.

As set forth in Section 18.1 of this Understanding, employees at the rank of Police
Lieutenant or below shall be assigned to work either a 4/10 Work Schedule or a 3/12.5
Work Schedule. Overtime is defined as all hours an employee is required to work in excess
of the regular workweek as set forth in either Section 18.1.1 or 18.1.2 of this Understanding,
or all hours worked in excess of 171 hours in a 28 consecutive day work period as provided
in Section 207(k) of the FLSA.

19.1.1 Employees of the rank of Lieutenant or below shall be compensated for as follows:

19.1.1.1 The overtime rate applicable under this section shall be one and one-
half (1) times the straight-time rate based upon the hourly rate of the
employee who works the overtime.

19.1.1.2 Whether an employee shall be compensated for overtime by
compensatory time off or by payment shall be at the sole discretion of
the employee's department director.

19.1.1.3 Flexing of shifts will only be used on a voluntary basis. Members shall
notify the BPA before they flex their schedule.

19.1.1.4 Work Week: For the purpose of computing overtime, the workweek
shall be defined as beginning at 12:01 a.m. Sunday and ending at
12:00 midnight Saturday.

Employees holding the rank of Captain shall be ineligible for overtime compensation. The
practice of permitting Captains to receive overtime for special events such as U.C. Berkeley
football games, the Fourth of July celebration, and for Federal Emergency Management Act
(FEMA) disaster work is hereby discontinued.

Emergency On-Call Status: An employee shall be paid or given compensatory time off for
being placed on emergency on-call status as follows:

Page 13
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

19.4

19.5

19.6

19.7

19.3.1 An employee who is placed on emergency on-call status on his or her regularly
scheduled work day shall be paid for a minimum of one hour and at a one-quarter
time rate (i.e., 0.25 multiplied by the hourly rate and multiplied by the number of
hours placed on emergency on-call status).

19.3.2 An employee who is placed on emergency on-call status on his or her regularly
scheduled day off shall be paid for a minimum of two hours and at a one-quarter time
rate (i.e., 0.25 multiplied by the hourly rate and multiplied by the number of hours
placed on emergency on-call status).

Compensatory Time Off: Compensatory time off may be earned in lieu of overtime pay at
the rate of one and one-half (1/2) hours for each overtime hour worked up to a maximum,
effective July 1, 1984, of one hundred twenty (120) hours in such compensatory time.
Consistent with FLSA regulations, upon termination of employment, employees will be paid
for the full amount of compensation for accumulated but unused compensatory time.
Utilization of compensatory time shall be determined by the department head with due
regard for the wishes of the employee and particular regard for the needs of service,
consistent with FLSA regulations.

Administrative Leave for Captains

19.5.1 Effective January 1 of each year, Captains shall be credited with forty (40) hours of
Administrative Leave. Such leave shall be in lieu of overtime earned by individuals in
the ranks of Lieutenant and below. After successful completion of six (6) months of
initial employment, employees are able to use Administrative Leave. Administrative
Leave which is not utilized during any calendar year will be credited to the
individual's vacation balance at the end of the calendar year. All rules governing
vacation balances and when vacation can be scheduled in Section 22 shall apply to
Administrative Leave.

19.5.2 Persons appointed to the rank of Captain during the calendar year shall receive
Administrative Leave prorated based on the number of pay periods remaining in the
calendar year.

Any hours worked on overtime are excluded from CalPERS reported “compensation
earnable” in California Government Code Section 20635.

Emergency Overtime - An employee is guaranteed at least three (3) hours overtime when
called to emergency overtime duty from his or her residence.

SECTION 20: COURT TIME

20.1

Court Overtime

20.1.1 Court overtime is defined as that overtime worked in connection with an assigned
appearance before any criminal of civil court, Police Review Commission meeting or

Page 14
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

Board of Inquiry, Department Board of Review, and any other specially approved
appearance on behalf of another City department or commission.

20.1.2 Unless otherwise approved by a Commanding Officer, all court overtime shall be
paid.

20.1.3 A sworn employee who makes an off-duty court appearance shall receive a
minimum of four (4) hours overtime unless his or her scheduled duty reporting time,
regular shift or overtime shift is less than four hours after the scheduled court
appearance in which case the employee will receive overtime in the lesser amount.

20.1.4 Overtime spent conferring with the prosecuting attorney will be considered as court
overtime and part of the court session only if the employee's presence is required in
court after the conference.

20.1.5 For off-duty, out-of-town court appearances, travel constitutes court overtime and is
determined by the round trip time from the Hall of Justice.

20.1.6 To receive court overtime credit, an employee shall submit an Extraordinary Duty
Report.

20.1.6.1 Subpoena should be attached and case number indicated if either or
both are available.

20.1.6.2 Report is to be completed by the employee and should specify the
amount of time required for "testifying/conferring," "time waiting," or if
“not needed."

20.1.6.3 The employee's supervisor shall review the report for accuracy and
complete the lower boxed area, indicating the court paid overtime
budget code, the Activity Code and the proper project designation.
20.2 Court Overtime/Telephone Stand-By

20.2.1 Sworn employees who are placed on telephone stand-by for the court will be
compensated by earned compensatory time as follows:

20.2.1.1 Duty Day: One hour minimum compensatory time and hour for hour
thereafter.

20.2.1.2 Day Off: Two hour minimum compensatory time and hour for hour
thereafter.

20.2.2 To receive compensatory overtime credit for telephone stand-by, an officer shall
submit an Extraordinary Duty Report.

20.2.2.1 Subpoena should be attached and case number indicated if either or
both are available.

Page 15
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

20.2.2.2 Report is to be completed by the officer and shall specify the case
number and the name of the Deputy District Attorney placing him or
her on telephone stand-by.

SECTION 21: RECOVERY TRANSFER TIME

21.1

21.2

21.3

Recovery Time Transfer is that system whereby an employee grants time from earned
compensatory time off, vacation leave or sick leave to another employee. Such transfer
of time shall be limited to situations where the recipient of the transfer is, by reason of
illness or injury, threatened with the loss of earnings due to his/her exhaustion of
employment benefits. Such time transfer request must be in writing, and subject to the
approval of the City Manager or designee. Such approval shall not be unreasonably
denied. Such transfer shall be credited to the recipient at the donor's rate of pay.
Recovery Transfer Time will not be used for industrial injuries or illnesses. The use or
receipt of Recovery Transfer Time shall not preclude possible medical separation of the
recipient employee. The City reserves the right to require medical verification by a
qualified medical practitioner of the recipient employee’s medical condition.

An employee may donate compensatory time off or vacation leave.

An employee may donate accrued but unused sick leave as Recovery Transfer Time
subject to the following conditions:

21.3.1 An employee may donate one hour of sick leave for each hour of compensatory
time off and/or vacation leave time donated for Recovery Time Transfer. To
donate sick leave hours beyond the number of hours of compensatory time off
and/or vacation leave time, the employee will be charged two hours of sick leave
for each hour of sick leave donated for use as Recovery Time Transfer.

21.3.2 The employee donating the sick leave must maintain a sick leave balance of at
least 120 hours after the donation of leave for Recovery Transfer Time.

Page 16
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
ARTICLE 3
LEAVES

SECTION 22: VACATION

22.1 All employees who have worked for the City six (6) months or more and have worked
half-time or more in the preceding year shall be entitled to vacation leave.

22.2 The times during the calendar year at which an employee shall take vacation shall be
determined by the Chief of Police or his or her designee in accordance with department
policies with regard for the wishes of the employee and particular regard for the needs of
service. With advance supervisory approval, vacations may be in increments of one (1)

nour.

22.3 Employees shall be entitled to annual vacation leave as follows:

 

Years of Service Vacation Accrual
The first (1) through third (3) years of service (except as
provided in Sections 22.4 and 22.5 below)
Fourth (4) through eleventh (11) years of service (except
as provided in Sections 22.4 and 22.5 below)
Twelfth (12) through seventeenth (17) years of service
(except as provided in Sections 22.4 and 22.5 below)
Eighteenth (18) through twentieth (20) years of service
(except as provided in Sections 22.4 and 22.5 below) 200 work hours
Twenty-first (21) and subsequent years of service (except
as provided in Sections 22.4 and 22.5 below) 240 work hours

 

80 work hours

 

120 work hours

 

160 work hours

 

 

 

 

 

22.3.1 Employees shall accrue vacation leave at the following rates:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Vacation Hours Earned Per Year Hours of Vacation Earned per
Hour of Regularly Scheduled

Work

90 0.0385

120 0.0577

160 0.0769

200 0.0962

240 0.1154

 

 

 

 

22.3.2 Use of Vacation Leave: Each employee shall be entitled to take during the first two
(2) years of employment only such annual vacation leave as the employee earns:
provided, however, that no employee with less than six (6) months of service shall be
entitled to take earned vacation leave.

22.3.3 Lateral Entry Vacation Accrual Rate at Time of Appointment: Subject to the
provisions of Section 22.1, an employee appointed through lateral entry shall accrue

Page 17
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

22.4

22.5

22.6

and take Vacation Leave commensurate with his or her experience as a sworn
peace officer.

Calculation of Vacation for Part-Time or Intermittent Employees: For an employee
who has worked on a part-time or intermittent basis, the actual years of service with the City
shall be used for the purpose of computing length of service in determining eligibility for
vacation as specified in Section 22.3.

22.4.1 Pro-Ration of Vacation for Part-Time or Intermittent Employees: Employees
working on an intermittent or part-time basis who have worked half-time or more in
the preceding calendar year without termination of employment shall be entitled to a
prorated vacation leave based upon the actual years of service with the City and
upon the actual amount of time worked in the preceding calendar year.

22.4.2 For the purpose of computing length of service in determining eligibility for vacation,
time spent an on extended military leave shall be counted as time spent in the
service of the City.

Maximum Vacation Leave Accrual Carryover: Employees can carry over from one
vacation year (see glossary) to the next no more than three hundred twenty (320) hours of
earned vacation.

22.5.1 Annual Vacation Leave Sell Back: Once per year, an employee will have the
option to sell to the City up to one hundred sixty (160) hours of accumulated vacation
time. The employee shall notify the Department on a form provided by the Auditor
that he or she is exercising this option no later than March 1 of any calendar year.
The City will pay the employee for the purchased vacation hours by March 31 of the
same calendar year.

22.5.2 Excess Vacation: Not later than October 1 of each vacation year, the City will notify
each affected employee of the amount of the employee's earned vacation projected
to exceed three hundred twenty (320) hours at the end of the vacation year. By
October 31, those employees notified of projected excess vacation will submit to the
Chief of Police a proposal for use of the projected excess vacation prior to the end of
the vacation year. Such a proposal may include both vacation leave and "sell back"
to the City.

22.5.3 An employee who has attained maximum accumulation, and does not submit a
proposal for use of excess vacation, may be required to take all the projected excess
earned vacation or receive pay in lieu thereof, at the option of the City. Such time off
shall be scheduled in accordance with the provisions of Section 22.2.

Return from Extended Unpaid Leave: An employee who has returned from extended
military leave or any other extended leave of absence without pay or who has been
reemployed or reinstated shall be entitled, during the calendar year in which the employee
returns to City service, to a prorated vacation based upon the total years of service with the
City and upon the total number of months of actual service with the City during the calendar
year. For succeeding calendar years, vacation shall be as provided in Section 22.

Page 18
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

22.7

22.8

Any employee who is granted a leave of absence without pay and who is off the payroll for
less than one hundred-sixty (160) consecutive hours shall be entitled to a full vacation. If
such an employee is off the payroll for the employee shall not earn vacation leave credit for
each one hundred-sixty (160) consecutive hours that he or she is off the payroll. Vacation
leave shall be accrued on hours worked or in a paid status exclusive of overtime.

Payment upon Death, Termination or Extended Leave: If, after six (6) months of
continuous service, an employee dies, is terminated or is granted an extended military leave
or other extended leave of absence without pay, such employee, or his or her estate shall
be paid for accrued but unused vacation leave .

22.8.1 Upon death or termination, if the vacation balance is negative, for employees who
received advanced vacation, such employee, or his or her estate, shall, on the same
basis, reimburse the City or the City may deduct the balance due from the
employee's salary due, accrued floating holidays, holiday pay due, compensatory
time due or sick leave, in the listed order of priority.

22.8.2 Payment for excess of vacation leave shall be made in lump sum at the time of
termination or death, as soon as possible.

SECTION 23: HOLIDAYS

23.1

23.2

23.3

All employees in Representation Units E and F who are required to work on any of the
hereinafter enumerated holidays, shall have the option of receiving compensation, in
addition to their regular monthly salaries, either in the form of holiday pay or compensatory
overtime. The holiday pay will be equivalent to the employee's regular hourly salary
multiplied by the number of hours worked during such day, except that the sum of the hours
compensated by holiday pay and hours taken as time off shall not exceed eight (8) for any
single holiday; or the employee shall receive compensatory time off at the straight-time rate
on the same basis. For purposes of overtime computation, holiday pay is not to be
considered compensation for time worked. Employees may utilize accrued compensatory
time off, vacation, floating holidays and/or administrative leave (if applicable) for the
difference between 8 hours and the number of hours in their regularly scheduled shift.

In the event that any of the enumerated holidays fall on a day which is not a regularly
scheduled workday, such employees shall, in addition to the regular salary which such
employees receive, be paid for eight (8) hours for each such holiday at straight-time rate
based upon their regular monthly salary or shall, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, be
given eight (8) hours of compensatory time off at a straight-time rate.

Recognized holidays for employees in Representation Units E and F to which this section
applies are as follows:

Page 19
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

 

 

 

 

 

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
New Year's Day Indigenous People's Day
Martin Luther King, Jr.s’ Birthday Veteran's Day
Washington's Birthday Thanksgiving Day
Lincoln's Birthday Day after Thanksgiving
Malcolm X's Birthday Christmas Day
Memorial Day (Any other special holiday as
Independence Day declared by the City
Labor Day Manager)
23.4 Floating Holidays: After successful completion of six (6) months of initial employment,
employees shall be granted three (3) floating holidays, equivalent to eight (8) hours each,
during the calendar year. The days selected shall be by mutual agreement between the

employee and the Chief of Police or his or her designee. In the event mutual agreement
cannot be reached, the time sought shall be added to his or her accrued vacation time.
Employees may take floating holidays in one (1) hour increments. Employees who
terminate employment within the first six (6) months of initial employment shall not be
eligible for payout of any accrued but unused floating holidays.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23.5 Pro-Rated Holidays: A new employee or an employee returning from a long term leave of
absence without pay will receive floating holidays on a pro-rated basis, according to the
following schedule:

Date of Hire or Return Floating Holiday Entitlement
January 1 - April 30 3
May 1 - August 30 2
September 1 - December 31 1

23.6 Employees shall receive specially declared holidays on the same basis as they now
receive other holidays.

SECTION 24: SICK LEAVE

24.1 Employees shall be entitled to take sick leave with full pay in case of sickness, disability,
or serious illness of the employee or of members of the employee's immediate family in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 24.2 to 24.7, inclusive.

24.2 Sick Leave Accrual: Each employee shall be credited with one (1) eight-hour work day

of sick leave with full pay for each month of service. Provided further that employees
hired on or after September 11, 2012 shall accrue eight (8) hours of paid sick leave for
each month of service. Employees hired before September 11, 2012 shall accrue sixteen
(16) hours of paid sick leave for each month of service after the completion of twenty (20)
years of service.

Actual accrual of sick leave will be based upon those days on which the employee was
on the payroll and receiving pay.

Page 20
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

24.3

24.4

24.5

24.6

An employee working on a part-time basis shall be entitled to use earned sick leave only
on a pro rata basis; for example, if an employee works half-time the employee shall be
paid for time off on sick leave on a half-time basis.

Intermittent Employees Use of Sick Leave: An employee who works on an intermittent
basis shall be entitled to use earned sick leave only for those days on which the
employee would have worked if the employee had not been sick; provided, however, that
an employee working on an intermittent basis who works only when called shall be
entitled to use earned sick leave only when the employee becomes sick after reporting to
work in response to such call.

Notice Requirements: Except in the case of emergencies, in order to receive
compensation while absent on sick leave the employee shall notify the Chief of Police or
other personnel designated by the Chief of Police at least one hour prior to the start of
the employee's daily duties.

Sick Leave Program: Effective December 23, 2012, the following Sick Leave Program
went into effect.

24.6.1 Five (5) Year Payout to PORAC Trust: If a sworn member of the Berkeley Police
Department (“Employee”) has an accrued sick leave balance on December 23,
2012 that exceeds 200 hours, one half of all those hours in excess of 200 shall be
maintained in a separate account. The financial value of those hours shall be
converted and deposited into the employee’s retiree Peace Officers Research
Association of California (PORAC) medical trust account over five successive
years in equal installments commencing on January 1, 2013 to January 1, 2017.
The conversion shall be at the Employee’s rate of pay on December 23, 2012.
The City may accelerate the payment of hours to be converted.

The remaining fifty percent (50%) of the sick leave balance in excess of 200 hours
shall be credited into the employee’s separate “catastrophic/service time” bank no
later than February 1, 2013 up to a maximum of 500 hours.

24.6.2 Annual Conversion to Cash: At the end of each calendar year, if an employee
has an accrued sick leave balance of 200 hours or more of sick leave, fifty percent
(50%) of all hours accrued in excess of 200 hours shall be converted to a cash
equivalent at the end of each calendar year. The annual cash conversion shall be
calculated at the employee’s hourly rate including additional pay such as POST
Pay, Bilingual Pay and Longevity Pay then in effect at the end of the calendar
year. The annual cash conversion shall be limited to 50% of the hours an
employee has accrued in excess of 200 hours as of December 31*' of each year.
The City shall pay the annual cash equivalent into an employee’s retiree PORAC.
medical trust account on behalf of the employee member. Upon retirement, any
sick leave hours that have not been converted onto an employee’s PORAC
medical trust account, used for the purpose of additional retirement service credit
as provided in PERL Section 20965, or “catastrophic/service time” bank shall be
forfeited.

Page 21
City of Berkeley

2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
Berkeley Police Association

The remaining fifty percent (50%) of accrued hours in excess of 200 hours, up toa
maximum of 500 hours, shall be maintained in the employee’s separate
“catastrophic/service time” bank. These hours are available for the employee’s
use in the event that the employee has a catastrophic illness or injury and has
exhausted all accrued sick leave hours and compensatory time off hours. At the
time of the employee’s retirement or termination, any sick leave balance in the
catastrophic/service time bank may only be used for additional retirement service
credit as provided in PERL Section 20965 and the employee cannot cash it out at
retirement or separation.

24.6.3 Catastrophic/Service Time Bank of Hours: The catastrophic/service time bank
of hours is available for use subject to the following conditions.

24.6.3.1

24.6.3.2

24.6.3.3

24.6.3.4

Employee or employee’s dependent family member must be
suffering from a catastrophic illness or injury. Catastrophic illness or
injury means an unanticipated life threatening illness or injury, either
for a permanent or temporary period anticipated to exceed thirty (30)
working days, that results in the incapacity of an employee or the
employee's dependent family member and by virtue of the illness or
injury to the employee or the employee's dependent family member,
the employee's ability to perform the essential functions of his or her
usual and customary occupation is limited.

Employees may also utilize “catastrophic/service time” bank hours
for the birth or adoption of a child.

Employee shall provide the City proof of catastrophic injury or illness
from an authorized health care provider on a form to be provided by
the City

The employee must have exhausted all of his or her available paid
leave balances (except accrued vacation) and, as a result, will be
placed on unpaid leave status unless the catastrophic/service time
bank is utilized.

24.6.4 Employee is prohibited from using the catastrophic/service time bank under the
following circumstances:

24.6.4.1

24.6.4.2

Employee is prohibited from using the catastrophic/service time
bank for any industrial injuries or illnesses that are covered by the
California workers’ compensation laws and regulations, except and
until the employee has exhausted all benefits under Labor Code
Section 4850 and all the employee’s available paid leave balances.

Employee is prohibited from simultaneously using the

catastrophic/service time bank and receiving benefits under any
Berkeley Police Association sponsored Long Term Disability benefit.

Page 22
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

24.7

24.8

24.9

24.10

24.11

24.6.4.3 The employee is not permitted to extend employment into retirement
through the use of catastrophic/service time.

24.6.4.4 Any balance in the catastrophic/service time bank at time of
employee’s retirement will not be cashed out. However, an
employee may use any balance to purchase CalPERS additional
service credit.

Family Sick Leave: Sick leave shall not be considered a privilege which an employee
may use at the employee's discretion but shall be allowed only in case of sickness or
disability or in the case of serious illness of the employee or within the immediate family
of the employee. Not more than fifteen (15) working days in any calendar year may be
taken as sick leave because of illness of a member of the employee's immediate family,
except for serious medical conditions covered under the provisions of Administrative
Regulation 2.4-Family Care Leave, federal Family and Medical Leave Act. The
immediate family of an employee, for the purposes of this section, shall include:
dependent residing in the employee's household, spouse, son, daughter, parent and
other relationships as determined by the City, such as domestic partner (see glossary).

Sick Leave Bonus: Employees shall be entitled to receive an additional eight (8) hours
of paid leave for every six (6) months of uninterrupted non-use of sick leave. Leave of
absence for any reason other than Vacation Leave, Administrative Leave, use of
Compensatory Time Off or Bereavement Leave, or partial day absences due to a
prescribed follow-up physical therapy or medical appointment (Payroll Code MO) for a
Workers’ Compensation claim, disqualifies an employee for this bonus. This additional
leave accrual is prorated for part-time employees. Not more than sixteen (16) additional
hours per year may be achieved; this paid leave may be used for any leave purpose
covered by this Understanding.

Affect of Extended Unpaid Absence: An employee who is granted a leave of absence
without pay and who is off the payroll for less than one hundred sixty (160) consecutive
hours. shall receive earned sick leave credit. If an employee is off the payroll for one
hundred sixty (160) consecutive hours or more, the employee shall not earn sick leave
credit for each one hundred sixty (160) consecutive hours that he or she is off the payroll.

Employees shall accrue sick leave credits for only those days on which the employee is
on the payroll and receiving pay.

Absenteeism Control System: The City may implement an absenteeism control
system, which will include the detailed and ongoing recording of absences and
counseling of employees regarding abuse, with management and supervisory personnel
having the discretion to require medical verification in instances where abuse appears
evident and to take disciplinary action as appropriate to correct patterns of abuse.

Page 23
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
SECTION 25: WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
25.1 All employees shall be entitled to such compensation as may be allowed pursuant to the

25.2

25.3

applicable provisions of the Workers' Compensation Insurance and Safety Act of the
State of California (specifically Labor Code Sections 4850 et seq.).

No sick leave shall be allowed for time off for an injury incurred while working for another
employer, provided that such injury is covered by the Workers' Compensation laws of the
State of California or other provision for payment for time off because of such injury is
made by such other employer. In the event such injury is not covered by the Workers'
Compensation laws of the State of California and no other provision for payment for time
off because of such injury is made by such other employer, sick leave in accordance with
the provisions of Section 24 shall be allowed only if such outside employment has been
approved by the City.

Workers’ Compensation salary in lieu of temporary disability payments as provided in
California Labor Code Section 4850 are reportable to CalPERS as compensation
earnable for a period not to exceed one year. Any temporary disability benefits, which
are coordinated with the employee’s available leave accruals, paid after one year is not
reportable to CalPERS as compensation earnable.

SECTION 26: FUNERAL LEAVE

26.1

26.2

In the case of death within the immediate family of an employee such employee shall be
entitled to remain absent from duty with pay in order to attend the funeral or memorial
service for a period not exceeding three (3) consecutive working days, or, in the case of a
funeral or memorial service conducted out of the State of California, for a period not
exceeding five (5) consecutive working days. The immediate family of an employee, for
the purpose of this section, shall be defined as: wife, husband, domestic partner, (see
glossary), mother, father, sister, brother, child, grandmother, grandfather, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, and grand-
children. A working day for the purpose of this section is based on the actual number of
hours an employee is normally scheduled to work (i.e., eight (8) hours; ten (10) hours; or
twelve and a half (12.5) hours.

Leave of absence with pay because of death in an employee's immediate family is
allowed provided the employee attends a funeral or memorial service during the time off,
and such leave shall not be charged against vacation or sick leave which an employee
may be entitled to but shall be in addition thereto.

In special cases, with the approval of the Chief of Police, the City Manager may grant a
death leave to allow an employee to attend funeral or memorial services because of the
death of a person not included within the definition of the immediate family.

In addition, employees may request, and the City will make reasonable efforts to

accommodate requests, for employees to supplement funeral leave by using accrued
vacation, compensatory time, or floating holidays.

Page 24
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

26.3 Bereavement Leave Statement: Any employee requesting funeral leave must submit a
statement and provide documentation if possible, i.e., obituary or funeral home or church
program or notice, that the family member meets the definition of “immediate family
members” as provided in Section 26.1. In recognition that there may be situations where
an employee is unable to provide funeral or memorial service documentation because
there was no formal service, the employee must so note that on the statement confirming
that the service occurred during the time period the employee was off work on funeral
leave.

SECTION 27: MILITARY AND MARITIME LEAVE

Military and Maritime Leave shall be governed by the provisions of the Federal Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) and any regulations
promulgated to implement the Act, and the California Military and Veteran’s Code. Employees
will be granted a leave of absence without pay with appropriate seniority, pay, status and
vacation as required by law for the purpose of fulfilling any required military obligation. If
allowed by the USERRA and/or the State of California Military and Veteran's Code, where the
employee is entitled to receive his/her regular pay during the period of the military leave, military
pay is to be deducted from the employee's regular pay from the inception of the military leave.

SECTION 28: FAMILY CARE LEAVE

Administrative Regulation 2.4 (Family Care Leave) is intended to comply with the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993 and the California Family Rights Act of 1991 as may be amended
from time to time. A copy of Administrative Regulation 2.4 is attached to this Memorandum of
Understanding for illustrative and convenience purposes. It is not the intent of the parties to
incorporate Administrative Regulation 2.4 into this Memorandum of Understanding. The
Association will be notified of any revisions to Administrative Regulation 2.4.

SECTION 29: LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY

29.1 Upon request of the employee, the Chief of Police may grant a leave of absence to an
employee within his or her department without pay not to exceed fifteen (15) working
days. No leave without pay shall be granted for more than fifteen (15) working days,
except upon the written request of an employee and approval of the City Manager.
Failure on the part of an employee on leave to report promptly at its expiration shall be
cause for discharge.

29.2 An employee must use all available compensatory and vacation leave, including banked
vacation, in order to become eligible for an approved leave of absence without pay. In
the event of illness, an employee must also exhaust sick leave prior to receiving
authorization for leave without pay. However, in the event of an illness or injury requiring
the use of sick leave, an employee has an option to notify the City in writing that he/she
wishes to freeze the use of sick leave after thirty (30) calendar days prior to receiving

Page 25
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

authorization for leave without pay in order to take advantage of an Association
sponsored Long Term Disability benefit.

29.3 In the event of a request for leave of absence for personal reasons (not related to
sickness), an employee must exhaust all compensatory and vacation time available prior
to receiving authorization for leave without pay.

SECTION 30: JURY DUTY LEAVE

An employee who is called or required to serve as a trial juror shall be entitled to be absent from
duties or service with the City with pay during the period of such service, as defined in the
glossary (Exhibit B) or while being present in court as a result of such call. Any employee,
working any shift, shall be eligible for this benefit. Jury duty that does not occur during the
employee's work shift but does occur on a scheduled work day, shall cause that employee's
next scheduled work shift to be shortened by the number of hours spent on jury duty.

Page 26
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
ARTICLE 4
HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS
SECTION 31: HOSPITAL-MEDICAL, DENTAL AND LIFE INSURANCE COVERAGE
31.1. Medical Coverage: The City will pay 100% of the premium for the applicable (single,

31.2

31.3

31.4

31.5

31.6

couple, family) Kaiser rate. Plans that are less expensive than or equal to the Kaiser plan
shall be fully paid by the City. For coverage under more expensive plans the employee
shall pay the difference through payroll deduction. If an employee chooses to complete
and submit to the an Affidavit of Domestic Partnership and sign up for medical benefits
for his or her domestic partner, the employee shall be subject to federal and state income
tax withholding.

The Understanding can be reopened on health plan topics by mutual consent. In
addition, the Association agrees to meet with the City during the term of this MOU in a
timely fashion following a City request, regarding whether the Association will agree to
meet and confer regarding how the City can avoid potential 2018 ACA excise tax
obligations and on a new and/or replacement health plan or plans and other methods to
reduce the current cost of health benefits.

Dental Coverage: The City shall provide a dental care program for employees. Dental
benefits will remain at 90% coverage of the Bay Area Usual, Customary and Reasonable
charges for the life of this Understanding. Effective January 1, 2002, the maximum
annual coverage will increase to $3,000 per calendar year and the lifetime limit on
orthodontia will be increased to $3,000. If an employee chooses to complete and submit
to the an Affidavit of Domestic Partnership and sign up for dental benefits for his or her
domestic partner, the employee shall be subject to federal and state income tax
withholding.

Should the City deem it feasible to provide the same level of benefits through another
provider or to provide such benefits on a non-insured basis, it will notify the Association
and, upon written request, will meet and confer on the matter.

Life Insurance: The City shall provide term life insurance of $100,000 for each
employee that shall include a standard accidental death and dismemberment provision of
a like amount. In addition, employees may purchase additional life insurance in
increments of $10,000 up to a maximum of $300,000 at a rate offered by the City’s
insurance carrier and subject to any medical exam as required by the insurance carrier.

Pro-Ration for Less Than Full-Time Employees: All career and grant-funded
provisional employees working less than a full forty (40) hour week shall receive prorated
rather than full fringe benefits and shall pay, by payroll deduction, the remainder of the
health and dental insurance premiums.

Cash In-Lieu: Effective the first full pay period following Council approval of this MOU,

and for those employees who show proof of alternate medical coverage, the City will
compensate the employee $560.72 per month.

Page 27
City of Berkeley

SECTION 32:

32.1

32.2

2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

Berkeley Police Association

RETIREE MEDICAL COVERAGE

Sick Leave Trust Fund: A retiree, with a sixty (60) day notice, may at any time request
a lump sum payment of the balance in his or her Sick Leave Trust Fund. Upon the death
of the retiree, any money in the account will be disbursed to the employee's estate.

Retiree Health Coverage: The City will establish an Internal Revenue Code Section
401 (a) plan for the purpose of paying the benefit provided in this Section.

The City shall pay to the retiree or his or her surviving spouse an amount equivalent to
the two party active Kaiser monthly medical insurance premium until the death of both.
(See Exhibit Letter from Kaiser dated September 14, 2001 attached to this Memorandum
of Understanding for illustrative and convenience purposes.) The maximum amount the
City shall pay to the retiree or his or her surviving spouse is based on the following

schedule:

 

Years of Service

Percentage to be Paid by the City

 

10 years of Service

City to pay an amount equal to 25% of the 2-party
Kaiser plan rate

 

15 years of Service

City to pay an amount equal to 50% of the 2-party
Kaiser plan rate

 

20 years of Service

City to pay an amount equal to 75% of the 2-party
Kaiser plan rate

 

25 Years of Service

 

 

City to pay an amount equal to 100% of the 2-party
Kaiser plan rate

 

 

32.2.1 Payment: If payment is made under the Code section 401(a)plan, the payment to

be made on a monthly basis shall be made directly to the retiree, or if the retiree is
deceased, to the surviving spouse. If payment is made under the retiree health
premium assistance plan per Section 32.3, the payment to be made on a monthly
basis shall be made directly to the provider who is providing retiree health
coverage to the retiree or his or her surviving spouse (if souse is eligible, per
Section 32.5.2). The retiree or surviving spouse assumes full responsibility for the
tax consequences for this benefit.

32.2.2 Notification of Death: The retiree or surviving spouse is exclusively responsible

for notifying the City of a death of his or her spouse. Such notification must be
reported in writing to the City by U.S. Postal Service addressed to: Director of
Finance, City of Berkeley Finance Department, 2180 Milvia Street, Berkeley, CA.
When both the retiree and surviving spouse die all payments under this Section
shall cease.

32.2.3 Notification of Change of Address: The retiree or surviving spouse is

exclusively responsible for notification to the City of his or her current mailing
address. A change in mailing address must be reported in writing to the City by

Page 28
City of Berkeley

2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
Berkeley Police Association

U.S. Postal Service addressed to: Director of Finance, City of Berkeley Finance
Department, 2180 Milvia Street, Berkeley, CA. If the U.S. Postal Service returns
payment checks for two consecutive months, the City will cease making payments
under this Section. However, if the retiree and/or surviving spouse re-establishes
contact with the City and notifies the City in writing of a new mailing address, the
City shall resume making payments including arrears payments for the period
when payment checks were undeliverable.

32.2.4 Payments Commence 10 Years After Retirement Plan: For employees retiring

32.2.5

32.2.6

on or after January 1, 1989 through July 5, 1997, the City shall begin making
payments to the retiree or his or her surviving spouse ten (10) years after the
employee retirees. No payments will be made under this Section until January 1,
1999. For the purposes of this Section, a “retiree” is anyone who separated from
the City on or after January 1, 1989, is vested in CalPERS, has ten years of
service as a sworn officer with the Berkeley Police Department and has reached
the age of 50. However, a “retiree” is also anyone, regardless of age, who
receives a disability or industrial disability retirement benefit from CalPERS and
has at least ten (10) years of sworn service with the Berkeley Police Department.

Payments Commence 5 Years after Retirement Plan: For employees retiring
on or after July 6, 1997, the City shall begin making payment to the retiree or his
or her surviving spouse, or to the provider of retiree health care coverage through
a newly established retiree health premium assistance plan, as applicable, five (5)
years after the employee retirees. No payments will be made under this Section
until July 6, 2002. For the purposes of this Section, a “retiree” is anyone who
separated from the City on or after July 7, 1997, is vested in CalPERS, has ten
years of service as a sworn officer with the Berkeley Police Department and has
reached the age of 50. However, a “retiree” is also anyone, regardless of age,
who receives a disability or industrial disability retirement benefit from CalPERS
and has at least ten (10) years of sworn service with the Berkeley Police
Department.

 

Payments Commence 2 Years after Retirement Plan: Effective July 1, 2008 for
employees retiring after July 1, 2007, the City shall begin making payments to or
on behalf of the retiree or his or her surviving spouse two (2) years after the
employee retirees. The maximum amount the City shall pay to or on behalf of the
retiree is based on the following schedule:

 

Years of Service Percentage to be Paid by the City

10 years of Service | City to pay an amount equal to 25% of the 2-
party Kaiser plan rate

 

 

15 years of Service City to pay an amount equal to 50% of the 2-
party Kaiser plan rate

 

20 years of Service City to pay an amount equal to 100% of the 2-

 

party Kaiser plan rate

 

 

 

Page 29
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

32.3

32.4

For the purposes of this Section, a “retiree” is anyone who separated from the City
on or after July 1, 2007, is vested in CalPERS, has ten years of service as a sworn
officer with the Berkeley Police Department and has reached the age of 50.
However, a “retiree” is also anyone, regardless of age, who receives a disability or
industrial disability retirement benefit from CalPERS and has at least ten (10)
years of sworn service with the Berkeley Police Department.

32.2.7 Overpayments: In the event of an overpayment, the procedures set forth in
Section 41 (Payroll Errors) of the Understanding shall apply to the recovery of
overpayments under this Section, with adjustments as appropriate to reflect that
retirees are no longer on the active payroll, so offsets or reductions must be made
to future payments that would become due under the applicable plan providing
benefits to the retiree or his or her surviving spouse.

Retiree Health Premium Assistance Coverage: Effective September 19, 2012, the City
will cease making contributions to an Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a) plan for the
purpose of paying the retiree health care benefit provided under this Section for any
employees hired on or after that date who would otherwise have qualified for benefits
under the terms described in this Section 32. Any employees hired on or after September
19, 2012, as well as any current employees who retire on or after such date, shall receive
the benefits described in this Section 32.3 as a benefit provided by the City under a newly
established retiree health premium assistance plan and related trust agreement. Any
benefits payable to employees who have retired prior to such date or to their surviving
spouses may continue to be made under the Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a) plan
that was established for such purpose to the extent benefits are not provided for such
retirees under the new retiree health premium assistance plan. Under the newly
established retiree health premium assistance plan, benefits will be the same as
previously provided under the 401(a) plan, except for different eligibility criteria and that
payment under the 401(a) plan was made directly to the retiree or his or her surviving
spouse, and under the new plan the City will pay the retiree health premium assistance
amount to the provider who is providing retiree health coverage to the retiree or his or her
surviving spouse (if spouse is eligible per Section 32.5.2. Upon the death of the retiree,
the amount provided to an eligible surviving spouse will be an amount equivalent to the
appropriate percentage of the single party active Kaiser monthly medical insurance
premium amount, which will continue until the death of the eligible surviving spouse. The
maximum amount the City shall pay towards coverage for the retiree or his or her
surviving spouse, either directly or to a health care provider on his or her behalf, is based
on the following schedule set forth in Section 32.5 et seq.

Amendment or Termination of 401(a) Plan - As provided under Section 32.2 (Retiree
Health Coverage), the City established an Internal Revenue Code Section 401 (a) plan for
the purpose of paying the benefits for retirees and their surviving spouses provided under
this Section 32 (Retiree Medical Coverage). Section 12 of that plan (Berkeley Police
Supplemental Retirement Plan) provides that such plan may be amended or terminated
in accordance with a Memorandum of Understanding between the City and the
Association. The City and the Association have determined that it is desirable, to the
extent legally permissible and administratively practicable, to offer benefits previously
provided under that Berkeley Police Supplemental Retirement Plan through a retiree

Page 30
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

32.5

health premium assistance plan and related trust under Section 115 of the Internal
Revenue Code. Additionally, the parties have agreed that the City may take reasonable
steps to amend or terminate the Berkeley Police Supplemental Retirement Plan, or spin-
off assets and liabilities under such Plan for certain covered participants into a new
section 401(a) plan that also may be amended or terminated, to the extent such actions
are necessary or desirable to accomplish, in providing future retiree medical premium
assistance benefits as described in this Section 32 (Retiree Medical Coverage) for some
or all of the covered retirees and their surviving spouses through a newly established
retiree health premium assistance plan and related trust.

Retiree Medical Coverage: For those employees who retire on or after September 19,
2012 and effective immediately upon the date of retirement, the City will assist in the
payment of medical insurance premium payments for the retiree and/or surviving
spouse/domestic partner by making payments directly to the medical insurance provider.
Retirees shall be permitted at their discretion to enroll in non-City sponsored health plans.
In that event, the City shall make medical insurance premium payments directly to the
health insurance provider equal in value to the City sponsored health plan. The City shall
not be responsible for any excess cost differentials associated with the direct payment of
premiums to non-City sponsored plans. The City will only make payments through its
third party administrator to provide medical insurance premium payments for an individual
plan and will not make payments for a group plan. The retiree and/or surviving spouse or
domestic partner will pay the administrative set up fee and the monthly administrative fee
established by the third party administrator. No cash payments will be paid directly to the
retiree and/or the retiree’s spouse/domestic partner.

There shall be no cash in lieu payments made under this benefit.

32.5.1 For employees that retire on or after September 19, 2012 the City will discontinue
the current practice of paying directly to the retiree the cash equivalent of the
active two-party Kaiser rate. However, for those employees who retired before
September 19, 2012, the City shall continue to make cash payments to these
retirees under the MOU provisions in effect at the time of their retirement.

32.5.2 Qualifying Spouse or Domestic Partner. A retiree will receive the appropriate
percentage of two-party coverage for a spouse or domestic partner that meets any
of the following criteria (“Qualifying Spouse”): (1) the spouse or domestic partner
of the retiree at the time of retirement; (2) for a retiree that did not have a spouse
or domestic partner at the time of retirement, the initial spouse or domestic partner
a retiree adds to his or her health plan after retirement; or, (3) for any retiree, a
subsequent spouse or domestic partner if the previous spouse or domestic partner
died. For all times that a retiree does not have a Qualifying Spouse, the City will
only pay the appropriate percentage of single party premium for that retiree. If a
retiree predeceases a Qualifying Spouse, the City will continue to pay the
appropriate percentage of single party premium for that individual.

32.5.3 In the event that an employee retires and initially elects not to utilize the Berkeley
retiree medical plan as described above, the employee may opt back into the

Page 31
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

Berkeley retiree medical plan during any open enrollment period with either single
only coverage or two-party coverage, if applicable.

32.5.4 The City will comply with any lawfully executed Qualified Domestic Relations
Order (QDRO) but under no circumstances will it provide retiree medical benefits
to more than two persons.

32.5.5 In order to be eligible for the Retiree Health Premium Assistance Coverage a
"Retiree" must meet all of the following criteria (note, this is different criteria than
used for previous plans):

32.5.5.1 A person who is vested in CalPERS, and
32.5.5.2 Has reached the age of 50, and,
32.5.5.3 Has retired from the City at age 50 or thereafter, and

32.5.5.4 Has applied for and is receiving a pension from CalPERS at the time
of retirement.

However, a “retiree” is also anyone, regardless of age, who receives a disability
retirement benefit, either industrial disability or non-industrial disability, from
CalPERS.

32.5.6 The maximum amount the City will contribute toward the payment of medical
insurance premiums is based on the employee’s years of service as a sworn
member of the Berkeley Police Department at time of retirement. The retiree must
have at least 10 years of service as a sworn member of the Berkeley Police
Department to qualify for this benefit.

32.5.7 The maximum amount the City will contribute toward payment of the medical
premium is based on the following schedule:

 

 

 

 

Years of Service Percentage to be Paid by the City

10 Years of City to provide medical premium assistance equal

Service to 25% of either the single party or two party
amount as determined below

15 Years of City to provide medical premium assistance equal

Service to 50% of either the single party or two party
amount as determined below

20 Years of City to provide medical premium assistance equal

Service to 100% of either the single party or two party
amount as determined below

 

 

 

 

There will be no pro-rating of years of service.

32.5.8 The City will assist the retiree and/or surviving spouse/domestic partner in the
payment of the medical insurance premium as follows:

Page 32
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

32.5.9 Early Retirees who are not Medicare Eligible: Beginning September 19, 2012,
each month after the employee retires, the City will pay the health care service
provider an appropriate percentage based on the chart in Section 32.5.7 of an
amount equal to $1,200.00 per month for two party coverage for the retiree anda
qualifying spouse/domestic partner or $600.00 per month for single party
coverage. Upon the death of either the retiree or the retiree’s spouse, the City will
only pay the appropriate percentage based on the chart in Section 32.5.7 of the
single party rate to the provider on behalf of the surviving retiree or
spouse/domestic partner. If there is no spouse/domestic partner at the time of
retirement, the City shall only pay the single party rate. The retiree and/or
surviving spouse/domestic partner will be responsible for payment of the
difference between the amount the City contributes toward payment of the
premium and the actual premium cost. The funds for this difference will come
from the retirees CalPERS retirement account and the retiree must authorize such
withdrawal of funds.

Beginning July 1, 2013 and effective each July 1 thereafter, the base rates the City
contributes toward payment of the premium amount described in the preceding
paragraph shall be increased by either the amount Kaiser increases the early
retiree plan medical premium for that year, or 6%, whichever is less. The retiree
and/or surviving spouse/domestic partner shall pay the difference between the
amount the City contributes toward payment of the premium and the actual
premium cost.

32.5.10 Retirees who reach Medicare eligibility age: Beginning September 19,
2012, for retirees who reach Medicare eligibility age, the City will pay the health
care service provider the appropriate percentage based on the chart in Section
32.5.7 of an amount equal to $765.80 per month for two-party coverage for the
retiree and spouse/domestic partner or $382.90 month for single party coverage.
Upon the death of either the retiree or spouse/domestic partner, the City will only
pay the appropriate percentage based on the chart in Section 32.5.7 of the single
party rate to the health care service provider on behalf of the surviving retiree or
spouse/domestic partner. If there is no spouse at the time of retirement, the City
shall only pay the single party rate. The retiree and/or surviving spouse/domestic
partner will be responsible for payment of the difference between the amount the
City contributes toward payment of the premium and the actual premium cost.
The funds for this difference will come from the retirees CalPERS retirement
account and the retiree must authorize such withdrawal of funds.

Beginning July 1, 2013 and each July 1 thereafter, the base rates the City
contributes toward payment of the premium amount described in the preceding
paragraph shall be increased by either the amount Kaiser increases the retiree
medical premium for that year, or 6% whichever is less. The retiree and/or
surviving spouse/domestic partner shall pay the difference between the amount
the City contributes toward payment of the premium and the actual premium cost.

Page 33
City of Berkeley

2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
Berkeley Police Association

Former employees who leave employment prior to age 50 and do not qualify as a
“Retiree” under the definition above (“non-qualifying retiree”) will not receive any
funds from the City, either directly or indirectly, for payment of medical insurance
premiums. However, a non-qualifying retiree shall be permitted to purchase health
insurance from the retiree medical pool if all of the following criteria are met:

32.5.10.1 The former employees is vested in CalPERS, and

32.5.10.2 Has reached the age of 50, and,

32.5.10.3 Has applied for and is receiving a pension from CalPERS, and

32.5.10.4 The City sponsored group health plan permits the retiree to enroll in
the retiree medical pool, and

32.5.10.5 The retiree pays all cost associated with enrolling and maintaining
eligibility in the group health plan, including, but not limited to, the
administrative set up fee and the monthly administrative fee
established by the third party administrator.

SECTION 33: SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT PLAN

Effective July 1, 2001 the City adopted a Supplemental Retirement Plan and Trust Agreement to
provide supplemental retirement income and other benefits for eligible career benefited
employees through the liquidation of termination pay.

Page 34
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

ARTICLE 5
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT

SECTION 34: PROBATIONARY PERIOD

34.1

34.2

34.3

34.4

34.5

Police Officer: Original appointments from employment lists for the classification of
Police Officer shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period of two (2) years of
actual service.

Completion of Probationary Period upon Return from Military Leave: Probationary
employees who are granted military leaves of absences shall complete the balance of
their probationary period within a period of six (6) months following their return to City
service. No provision of this Section 34 shall be interpreted to preclude the City from
establishing new classifications which may require probationary periods of varying
lengths.

Field Training Officer Rating: Probationary Police Officers will be rated daily/weekly
while in the Field Training Officer (FTO) program, and then semi-annually thereafter.

Other Probationary Periods: Original and promotional appointments to classes above
the rank of Police Officer shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period of six (6)
months of actual service and shall be completed within a one (1) year period.

Provisional Appointments During Probationary Period: If, before completing the
required probationary period, an employee is provisionally appointed to a higher class in
the same or a related series of classes, the time served in such higher class shall be
counted toward completion of the probationary period in the lower class.

Completion of Probationary Period: If the service of the probationary employee has
been satisfactory to the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall file with the Director of
Human Resources a statement in writing to such effect and stating that the retention of
such probationary employee in the service is desired. If such service has been
unsatisfactory, the department head shall file with the Director of Human Resources such
a statement, in writing, with the recommendation to the City Manager that the employee
be rejected.

Rejection During Probationary Period: During the probationary period, an employee
may be rejected at any time without right of appeal or hearing except as provided by the
procedures mandated by Government Code 3303 and 3304, as well as provided in
Section 40.8.5 of this Understanding. An employee rejected from a position to which the
employee has been promoted shall be reinstated to the position from which the employee
was promoted unless charges are filed and the employee is discharged as provided in
Section 37.

Page 35
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
SECTION 35: PROMOTION/EXAMINATION
35.1 Promotional Exams: Insofar as practicable and consistent with the best interests of the

35.2

35.3

35.4

35.5

35.6

service, all vacancies in the competitive service shall be filled by promotion from within
the competitive service after a promotional examination has been given and a
promotional list established.

Tests and Applications: Regular tests shall be given for all ranks including promotional
ranks. Applications for Police Officer shall be accepted on a continuous testing basis.
Tests for Sergeant, Lieutenant and Captain shall be given at least every two years.

From the time that a promotional list no longer contains any names, 1) the City will make
a conscientious effort to hold a written examination within ninety (90) days, but in any
event will hold the examination within one hundred twenty (120) days; and 2) the City will
announce the written examination at least sixty (60) days before the examination takes
place.

Notice of Examinations: Selection criteria shall be reflected on all examination
announcements. All phases of each examination shall be listed in the examination
announcement. A study list shall be included in each examination announcement. Each
examination shall be announced no less than 60 calendar days in advance of the written
test date.

Open Competitive Examination: [f, in the opinion of the City Manager, the best
interests of the service can be served by an open, competitive examination instead of a
closed, promotional examination, and if there is not already a promotional list for the
higher position, which list has not been abolished and from which the vacancy could be
filled, then the City Manager may instruct the Director of Human Resources to call for
applications for the vacancy and arrange for an open, competitive examination and for
the preparation and publication of an eligibility list.

Criteria for Promotion: Employees who have qualified for promotional lists shall be
considered for promotion based on the following factors: previous work performance,
previous training and experience, merit (proven ability or accomplishment), seniority,
current and previous special/temporary duty assignments held.

SECTION 36: DEMOTION

36.1

36.2

City Manager Authority: The City Manager may demote an employee who so requests
it, or whose ability to perform required duties falls below standard, or for disciplinary
purposes. No employee shall be demoted to a class for which the employee does not
possess the minimum qualifications as determined by the Director of Human Resources.

Notice Requirements: Notice of the demotion shall be given the employee no later than
two (2) weeks prior to the effective date of demotion, and a copy of said notice shall be
filed with the Director of Human Resources. Any employee who has been demoted shall
be entitled to receive a written statement of the reasons for such action.

Page 36
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

36.3

36.4

Permanent Status: An employee with permanent status who is demoted shall assume
permanent status in the class to which the employee is demoted.

Demotion to Vacant Position: Upon request of the employee, demotion may be made
to a vacant position as a substitution for layoff. In such cases, the employee shall be
restored to his or her former position without further examination whenever such position
is again to be filled in accordance with the reemployment provisions in Section 57.

SECTION 37: SUSPENSION AND DISCHARGE

37.1

37.2

37.3

37.4

37.5

37.6

30 Calendar Day Maximum Suspension: The City Manager may suspend an
employee from his or her position at any time for just cause. Suspension without pay
shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar days, nor shall any employee be penalized by
suspension for more than thirty (30) calendar days in any one-year period.

Suspensions of 3 Days or Less: For just cause, the Chief of Police may suspend an
employee for not more than three (3) working days for any one offense. Such
suspension shall be reported immediately to the City Manager. At any step in the
process of reviewing recommended disciplinary actions, the City Manager may elect to
impose more severe discipline.

Discharge: An employee may be discharged at any time by the City Manager, but if the
probationary period has been completed, then such discharge must be for a cause. Any
employee who has been discharged shall be entitled to receive a written statement of the
reasons for such action.

120 Day Limit on Imposition of Discipline: The City agrees that no disciplinary action
against an employee covered by this Understanding, which action involves a loss or
reduction of pay or discharge, shall be imposed unless such action is taken within one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days after the date of the incident giving rise to the
disciplinary action or within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of the date the City
has knowledge of the incident giving rise to the disciplinary action.

If a letter of advice or written reprimand is issued by the Department, neither the
document nor any testimony offered by the Department or the City in an appeal process
shall reference any time restrictions set forth in this section, nor reference any other
discipline that may have been considered, recommended or imposed, but for the time
restrictions set forth herein.

Suspension of FLSA Exempt Employees: Notwithstanding any of the above, FLSA
exempt employees in the rank of Captain and above shall not be suspended except as
permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act.

All references in Sections 37.1 and 37.2 to “days” shall be calculated in terms of eight (8)
hour equivalencies, unless otherwise provided.

Page 37
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

SECTION 38: RESIGNATION

An employee wishing to leave the competitive service in good standing shall file with the Chief
of Police, at least two (2) weeks before leaving the service, a written resignation stating the
effective date and reasons for leaving. The resignation shall be forwarded to the Director of
Human Resources with a statement by the Chief of Police as to the resigned employee's
service, performance and other pertinent information concerning the cause for resignation.
Failure of the employee to give the notice required shall be entered on the service record of the
employee and may be cause for denying future employment by the City. The resignation of an
employee who fails to give notice shall be reported by the Chief of Police immediately.
Resignations shall take effect on the last day of the pay period in which an employee works
unless the City Manager determines that it is in the City's best interest to accept the resignation
immediately.

SECTION 39: REINSTATEMENT

A permanent or probationary employee who has resigned with a good record may be reinstated
within two (2) years to the employee's former position, if vacant, or to a vacant position in the
same or comparable class without further competitive examination. This section shall not be
interpreted as a guarantee of reinstatement to an employee who has resigned with a good
record and who requests reinstatement within two (2) years.

Page 38
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
ARTICLE 6
GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURE
SECTION 40: GRIEVANCE & DISCIPLINARY APPEAL PROCEDURE
40.1 A grievance is any dispute which involves the interpretation, application, claimed

40.2

40.3

violation, or claimed noncompliance with the provisions of the Understanding between
the City and the Association or with any City ordinance, rule, or regulation which may
have been or may hereafter be adopted by the City to govern personnel practices or
working conditions of City employees covered by the Understanding, including any rule,
regulation, or resolution which may be adopted by the City Council which results from the
meet-and-confer process. The grievance procedure discussed below shall be the dispute
resolution mechanism applicable to employees covered by this Understanding.

A disciplinary appeal is the procedure established hereunder to afford an employee his or
her due process rights. An employee may appeal the recommendation or imposition of
discipline for demotion, pay reduction, suspension or discharge other than probationary
discharge.

Grievance Procedure: Grievances shall be processed in the following manner:

40.3.1 Step 1: Any employee who believes he or she has a grievance (and/or the
employee's Association representative) may discuss the employee's complaint
with the Chief of Police or with such subordinate management official as the Chief
of Police may designate. Nothing in this Section precludes an employee from
utilizing the chain of command to solve grievances and/or complaints. If the issue
is not resolved within five (5) days, the employee (and/or the employee's
Association representative) may elect to invoke the procedure hereinafter
specified.

40.3.2 Step 2: Any grievance which has not been resolved by the procedures
hereinabove set forth may be referred to the City Manager by the affected
employee or by the Association within ten (10) working days of receipt of the
decision at Step 1. Any such referral shall be in writing, and the specific issues
involved shall be detailed in such referral, together with a statement of the
resolution which is desired. The City Manager shall designate a representative to
investigate the merits of the complaint and to meet with the complaining employee
(and/or the employee's Association representative). The City Manager shall issue
a written decision to the grievant and the Union within ten (10) working days of the
meeting. This shall conclude Step 2 of the Grievance Procedure.

40.3.3 Step 3: If the Association is not satisfied with the City Manager's decision at Step
2 of the Grievance Procedure, the Association may require that the grievance be
referred to an impartial arbitrator by notifying the City Manager within ten (10) days
of the conclusion of Step 2. Either the Association or the City may require that the
grievance be referred to an impartial arbitrator if for any reason forty-five (45) days
have elapsed from the date upon which the grievance was received by the City
Manager.

Page 39
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

40.4

40.5

40.6

40.7

A list of five arbitrators shall be requested from the California State Mediation and
Conciliation Services (SMCS). The impartial arbitrator shall be selected by either
mutual agreement between the Association and the City Manager, or designee, or
by each side taking turns striking a name from the arbitrator list with the question
of which party shall strike first determined by a coin flip. The Association shall
forward to the City the Association’s portion of the SMCS fee within thirty (30) days
of selection of the arbitrator. The fees and expenses of the arbitrator and of a
court reporter shall be shared equally by the Association and the City. Each party,
however, shall bear the cost of its own presentation, including preparation and
post-hearing briefs, if any.

Arbitrator Decisions: Arbitrator decisions on matters properly before them which
pertain to grievances as defined in Section 40.1 of this Understanding shall be in the
forms of recommendations to the City Manager, who may, within five (5) days of receipt
of said decision, reject said decision. In the event of said rejection, then, as to that
particular grievance, the fees and expenses of the arbitrator and the court reporter shall
not be shared by the Association, and full payment thereof shall be the sole responsibility
of the City.

Grievance of Affirmative Action Program: Any grievance which in any way affects the
implementation of the City's affirmative action program shall not be subject to arbitration.
The decision as to whether or not implementation of the affirmative action program is in
any way involved shall be made at the sole discretion of the City Manager. If, in the City
Manager's judgment, any grievance involves the affirmative action program, the Equal
Employment Opportunity and Diversity Officer shall notify the Association to that effect in
writing within seven (7) days of the date upon which the grievance is received in the
Human Resources Department and in such notification refer to that section of the
affirmative action program which is involved; provided, however, that such notice may
come at any time prior to arbitration if additional factors come to the attention of the Equal
Employment Opportunity and Diversity Officer on the basis of which he or she considers
it appropriate to change his or her original determination.

No arbitrator shall entertain, hear, decide or make recommendations on any dispute
unless the Association seeks a determination or if the dispute involves 1) the issue of unit
determination; 2) a question of representation; 3) an aggrieved employee not in a
classification of the units represented by the Association; or 4) non-punitive transfers,
promotional decisions, and probationary employee terminations except as provided in
Sections 34.5 and 40.8.5 et seq. of this Understanding.

Compensation Grievances: All complaints involving or concerning the payment of
compensation shall be initially filed in writing with the Director of Human Resources. In
such cases no adjustment shall be retroactive for more than thirty (30) days from the date
upon which the complaint was filed or thirty (30) days from the date when an employee
may reasonably be expected to have learned of said claimed violation. Only complaints
which allege that employees are not being compensated in accordance with the rules,
regulations, and resolutions of the City Council or in accordance with the understandings
contained in any memorandum agreement which has resulted from the meet-and-confer

Page 40
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

40.8

process shall be considered as grievances. Any other matters of compensation are to be
resolved in the meet-and-confer process and, if not detailed in the Memorandum of
Understanding which results from such meet-and-confer process, shall be deemed
withdrawn until the meet-and-confer process is next opened for such discussion.

Disciplinary Appeals
Disciplinary Appeals shall be processed in the following manner:

40.8.1 Step 1: Except as provided for suspensions of not more than three (3) days as
provided in Section 37.2, the imposition of a disciplinary demotion, pay reduction,
suspension or discharge of an employee will be in the form of a written
recommendation from the Chief of Police to the City Manager. For suspensions of
not more than three (3) days, the Chief of Police may impose such discipline
subject to the appeal procedures set forth hereunder. No disciplinary appeal
involving the disciplinary demotion, pay reduction, suspension or discharge of an
employee will be entertained unless it is filed in writing with the Chief of Police
within five (5) days of the time at which the affected employee was notified of such
action in writing.

40.8.2 Step 2: The affected employee may appeal the recommendation to impose
discipline, or the imposition of discipline for suspensions of not more than three (3)
days, to the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The affected employee shall be
entitled to a personal conference with the Chief of Police or his or her designee or
the affected employee may choose to make an appeal in written form. The Chief of
Police or his or her designee shall communicate a decision in writing within ten
(10) days after the completion of the personal conference with the affected
employee or receipt of the written appeal. This shall conclude Step 2 of the
Disciplinary Appeal Procedure.

40.8.3 Step 3: Any disciplinary appeal which has not been resolved by the procedures
hereinabove set forth may be referred to the City Manager within five (5) days after
conclusion of Step 2 by the affected employee or the Association. The City
Manager shall designate a personal representative to meet with the affected
employee and/or the employee's Association representative and hear the
disciplinary appeal or the affected employee may choose to make an appeal in
written form.. The City Manager's designee shall communicate a decision within
twenty (20) days after the completion of the personal conference with the affected
employee or, if the employee chooses to make an appeal in written form, receipt of
the written appeal. If the City Manager’s designee, in pursuance of the procedures
outlined above resolves a disciplinary appeal as defined in Section 40.2 above, the
City Manager's designee may order payment for lost time or wages or
reinstatement with or without payment for lost time. This shall conclude Step 3 of
the Disciplinary Appeal Procedure.

40.8.4 Step 4: If the Association is not satisfied with the City Manager’s designee’s
decision at Step 3 of the disciplinary appeal procedure, the Association may

Page 41
City of Berkeley

2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
Berkeley Police Association

require that the disciplinary appeal be referred to an impartial arbitrator by notifying
the City Manager within ten (10) days of the conclusion of Step 3.

A list of five arbitrators shall be requested from the California State Mediation and
Conciliation Services (SMCS). The impartial arbitrator shall be selected by mutual
agreement between the Association and the City Manager or designee, or by each
side taking turns striking a name from the arbitrator list with the question of which
party shall strike first determined by a coin flip. The Association shall forward to
the City the Association’s portion of the SMCS fee within thirty (30) days of receipt
of the City Manager’s response.

The fees and expenses of the arbitrator and of a court reporter shall be shared
equally by the Association and the City. Each party, however, shall bear the cost
of its own presentation, including preparation and post-hearing briefs, if any.
Arbitrator decisions on matters properly before them which pertain to the
disciplinary actions involving the suspension, demotion, pay reduction or discharge
of an employee shall be final and binding on both parties.

40.8.5 Notwithstanding their probationary status, probationary employees may use the

40.9 Days

grievance process for disciplinary actions other than termination.

40.8.5.1 Probationary Employees’ Appeal of Discipline: Notwithstanding
his or her probationary status, a probationary employee has appeal
rights for disciplinary action where the employee alleges that the
City’s action was for an illegal or discriminatory reason, such as the
exercise of Association membership, political affiliation, or other
constitutionally protected activities; provided, however, that any
appeal by a probationary employee of rejection from probation
alleging a violation of his or her rights under Title VII (42 U.S.C.
Section 2000e, et. seq.) or the California Fair Employment and
Housing Act (California Labor Code Section 12900 et. seq.) may be
pursued as provided in the City’s Affirmative Action program, which
shall be specifically amended to allow probationary employees a
right of appeal under that program. Nothing in this Section 40.8.5.1
is intended to preclude a probationary employee from seeking
enforcement of rights through state and/or federal regulatory
agencies or in courts of competent jurisdiction.

40.8.5.2 “Lubey” Hearing: A probationary employee who is terminated on
grounds of misconduct may establish a formal record of the
circumstances surrounding his or her termination, but is not entitled
to a determination that his or her dismissal was for "just cause."
Such a grievance shall terminate upon the conclusion of Section
40.8.3. The City Manager's decision at Section 40.8.3 is final and is
not subject to further review.

Defined: All references in this Section 40 to "days" shall mean calendar days

unless otherwise provided.

Page 42
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

40.10 Waiver of Time Lines: The time lines contained in this Grievance and Disciplinary
Appeal Procedure may be waived for a specific time period at any step in the Procedure
with the mutual agreement of the parties.

Page 43
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

ARTICLE 7
MISCELLANEOUS TERMS AND CONDITIONS

SECTION 41: PAYROLL ERRORS

To ensure that system or other errors which affect an employee’s pay are processed in an
efficient and effective manner, the City shall notify the affected employee(s) as soon as
practicable. Payroll errors detected by an employee shall, as soon as practicable, be
communicated to the employee’s Departmental Payroll Clerk. In the case of under payments,
the Payroll Clerk shall submit the appropriate adjustments as soon as practicable.

Payroll errors identified by the Auditor will be communicated to the employee either directly by
Auditor staff or through the Departmental Payroll Clerk. Under payments will be processed as
soon as practicable.

In the event of an overpayment or underpayment, no adjustment shall be retroactive for more
than the applicable statute of limitations. As to any overpayment, the Auditor's Office will
determine a reasonable repayment schedule and inform the employee of the schedule directly,
or through the Department Payroll Clerk. The affected employee shall be given an opportunity
to discuss the schedule of repayment and, if necessary, to request an adjustment to the
repayment schedule as a needed and reasonable accommodation. Factors considered in
determining a reasonable accommodation for repayment of wages include, but are not limited
to, the length of time the overpayment has occurred, the amount of the overpayment, the
employee’s normal salary, and other financial obligations of the employee.

In the event that the employee disputes the determination of the Auditor's Office as to a
reasonable accommodation for repayment, the employee may appeal the Auditor's Office
decision to the City Manager. The employee may appeal the decision of the Auditor’s Office in
writing within thirty (30) days of the Auditor's Office decision as to a repayment schedule. The
City Manager, or his/her designee, shall meet with the affected employee and consider the
matter for final determination. The City Manager's decision shall be issued no later than thirty
(30) days from the date the affected employee met with the City Manager or his or her designee.
The determination of the City Manager shall be final.

In the event that (1) the employee does not respond within 5 working days of being notified of
the overpayment, or (2) mutual agreement on the repayment schedule is not achieved within 10
working days of the employee being notified of the overpayment, the Auditor's Office will
proceed to implement a reasonable repayment schedule.

Page 44
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
SECTION 42: PERSONAL CONDUCT
42.1 Employees shall follow the General Orders and Regulations of the Berkeley Police

42.2.

42.3

Department, as written and as they may be amended.

Off the Job Activities: No employee shall be disciplined for off-the-job activities which
do not affect his or her job performance.

Official Badge/Insignia: No official or employee who wears a badge or other official
insignia as evidence of his or her authority and identity shall permit such badge insignia
to be used or worn by any other person of the same or another department, or otherwise
to leave his or her possession, without approval except as to persons regularly and
formally appointed by the City Manager to the position designated by the badge or
Insignia.

SECTION 43: UNIFORMS

43.1

43.2

43.3

Effective June 27, 2010, the annual uniform allowance shall be $1,400. The uniform
allowance is intended to cover uniform expenses incurred by the employee during the six
months prior to the payment and shall be paid semi-annually in installments of equal
amounts. However, the amount the City contributes toward the uniform allowance is
subject to federal and state income tax withholding. The Uniform Allowance shall be
reported to CalPERS as Special Compensation under authority of the statutory
requirement provided in the Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the California Code of
Regulations Subchapter 1, Article 5, Section 571(a)(5).

Effective June 29, 2008, in addition to the annual uniform allowance set forth in Section
43.1, employees assigned to the Special Response Team (S.R.T) shall be paid an
annual uniform allowance of $1,500. The S.R.T. uniform allowance is intended to cover
uniform expenses incurred by the employee in the performance of training and duties
related to this assignment and shall be paid annually in December for those members of
the S.R.T. team who are members of the team on November 1* of any year. However,
the amount the City contributes toward the S.R.T. uniform allowance is subject to federal
and state income tax withholding. The S.R.T. Uniform Allowance shall be reported to
CalPERS as Special Compensation under authority of the statutory requirement provided
in the Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the California Code of Regulations Subchapter
1, Article 5, Section 571 (a)(5).

Pro-Rated Uniform Allowance: Employees who are hired during the year or are absent
from work by reason of leave without pay shall receive a reduced uniform allowance in
accordance with the following schedule:

 

Absence of: | Percentage Reduction

 

 

 

 

3 months 25%
6 months 50%
9 months 75%

 

Page 45
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

 

Absence of: | Percentage Reduction
12 months 100%

 

 

 

 

 

43.4 Uniform and Equipment Committee: The Uniform and Equipment Committee will be
charged with adopting specifications and regulations governing the wearing of uniforms
and plain clothes. All components of the uniform are subject to the approval of the Chief
of Police.

43.5 Rain Gear: Rain Gear specifications as currently listed in the Uniform/Equipment
Specifications Manual under subsection XIX (e) will be updated to reflect optional rain
gear (Jacket and Pants) that may be purchased at the employee’s expense for use
during inclement weather.

SECTION 44: SAFETY GLASSES

The City's present safety glass program provides that the City will guarantee replacement of
prescriptions broken in the line of duty, but it is understood that the City will be under no
obligation to routinely provide safety glasses to every police officer simply desiring a pair.

SECTION 45: SAFETY AND TRAINING

45.1 Responsibility: Responsibility for developing training programs for employees shall be
assumed by the City Manager. Such training programs may include lecture courses,
demonstrations, assignment of reading matter or such other devices as may be available
for the purpose of improving the efficiency and broadening the knowledge of municipal
employees in the performance of their duties.

45.2 Special Training Courses: Participation in and successful completion of special training
courses may be considered in making advancements and promotions. Evidence of such
activity shall be filed with the Chief of Police.

45.3 Ammunition and Firing Range Program: The City shall provide the necessary amount
of ammunition for employees for use in City-sponsored range programs. The
Department will enforce requirements of regular employees participating in range
programs. Employees who do not perform at a passing standard will receive instruction
and retake the test during the regularly scheduled range program. Employees who are
not able to achieve the minimum standard within a reasonable period of time will be
immediately assigned to work on an intensive basis with the range master who will
evaluate the severity of the problem. Consistent inability to meet the standard may be
cause for termination.

45.4 Safety Programs: The City and the Association will make every effort to maintain
excellent health and safety standards. No employee shall be required to perform work
with unsafe equipment or perform duties that are not in compliance with safety
procedures or protocols. To further these purposes, the City shall maintain an ongoing

Page 46
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

safety program which shall include committees comprised of representatives from the
Association and appropriate supervisory personnel.

45.5 No employee shall be required to drive a vehicle, the mechanical condition of which is in
violation of the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

SECTION 46: USE OF AUTOMOBILES

The City Manager shall govern the use of City-owned automotive equipment and privately
owned automobile equipment by such rules and regulations as he or she may establish. The
mileage reimbursement will be equal to the amount established by the Internal Revenue
Service, and will change as necessary to comply with the IRS standard mileage rate.

SECTION 47: ANNUAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

The City will provide one (1) physical examination (based on the City's specification as to scope
of examination and examiner) each year to each employee in a classification categorized as a
"high risk" classification (see glossary). Participation in the physical examination program shall
be mandatory.

SECTION 48: ASSIGNMENTS FOR TEMPORARILY DISABLED EMPLOYEES

48.1 Employees on Workers' Compensation Leave: The City may assign any employee on
Workers' Compensation leave who is medically released to return to modified duty when
feasible, to such work within the Police Department which is consistent with medical
limitations as determined by the attending physician and the employee's skills and
abilities at no reduction in the employee's regular rate of pay. Prior to changing the shift
of a member who is medically released to return to work on modified duty, the
Department shall make a reasonable and good faith effort to accommodate the member's
personal/family scheduling for the duration of the period on modified duty. However, if
the Department is not able to accommodate the member’s personal/family scheduling for
the period of the modified duty the Department is not precluded to change the member's
shift.

48.2 Non-industrial Disabilities

48.2.1 The City may accommodate an employee disabled with a non-industrial disability
by providing a modified work assignment. The City will periodically review such
modified assignments in order to determine whether such assignments continue to
meet the needs of the City.

48.2.2 The modified assignment may be in that employee's classification. To be eligible
for such a modified assignment, the employee must initially, and subsequently at
the request of the City, provide the Human Resources Department with a medical
statement from his or her attending physician that clearly states the medical

Page 47
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

limitations and abilities of the employee and estimates when the employee will be
able to return to a regular assignment. If modification of that assignment within
that employee's classification does not serve the best interests of the City, other
classifications may be considered, subject to the approval of the Director of
Human Resources. Compensation will be provided at the level of the classification
in which the temporarily disabled employee works during the disability. The
employee must meet standards of satisfactory performance for the duration of the
work assignment.

SECTION 49: ANNUAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

The City may implement a program of annual performance evaluation. Such evaluations shall
be conducted by the employee's immediate supervisor and reviewed by additional levels of
supervision. Each employee may make written comments on the evaluation which shall be
made a part of the employee's personnel record.

In Line of Duty Death Notification Package: At this time, each employee shall be given an
opportunity to update or fill out his or her “In Line of Duty Death Notification Package”. This
Package is to be maintained by the Administrative Captain in a sealed envelope and be opened
only in the event of the officer's death.

SECTION 50: RESERVE OFFICER FUNCTIONS

50.1 Reserve officers shall not be regularly assigned to perform, police functions normally
performed by a sworn officer working in a pay status (i.e., normal beat patrol, walking
beats, normal detective functions, etc.). Reserve officers may be used by the
Department to supplement police services, such as for additional staffing for special
projects, in emergencies, for traffic or crowd control, in positions where they have been
utilized previously, or in other short-term circumstances.

50.2 Special Events: Any outside requests for police services for special events shall be
offered first to employees represented by the Association. Reserves can only be used for
such events when the overtime, after being offered to regulars, does not sell within 48
hours of the event. In any event, minimal patrol division staffing levels will take priority
over special events. Sponsored events traditionally staffed by reserved officers are not
affected by this section. These sponsored events include the following which is provided
for illustrative purposes:

Earth Day Celebration

People’s Park Celebration

Berkeley Unified School District Youth Celebration
Berkeley Unified School District Football Games
Live Oak Park Faire

Triple Rock Beer Festival

Berkeley Cycle Club

4th Street Bicycle Race

Page 48
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley

50.3

Asian Pacific Heritage Fair
Cinco de Mayo

Juneteenth

July 4th Fireworks

Berkeley Kite Festival

Civic Center Criterium

Cajun Music Festival

How Berkeley Can You Be?
Jupiter Jam Concerts

Solano Stroll

Telegraph Avenue Street Fair
Berkeley Beer Festival
Elmwood Street Fair
Indigenous Peoples Day
Korean Day

Berkeley Jazz Festival
Telegraph Avenue Holiday Fair

University of California Events (samples listed below)
University of California Football events

University of California Basketball Team Parade
University of California dignitary visits

Berkeley Police Association

If the Association believes that reserve officers are being utilized inappropriately, it may
meet with the Chief of Police or his or her designee to discuss such disputes or
disagreements and to attempt to resolve any disputes or disagreements. Disputes
regarding utilization of reserve officers shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.

SECTION 51: CLEAN WORK SITE

The City shall make every effort to maintain a clean work site with properly equipped lavatory
and shower rooms.

SECTION 52: WEIGHT ROOM

The Association will enter into a lease with the City which provides for the Association to lease
exercise equipment to the City for use by Police Department employees for the nominal charge
of $1 per year. The lease agreement will hold the Association harmless against any claims
related to that equipment or its use. The City agrees to keep the weight room clean and
maintain the equipment.

Page 49
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

SECTION 53: PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS

53.1 The City may require employees to submit to physical or psychiatric examinations by a
City appointed physician where reasonable cause exists to believe that the employee is
suffering from a physical or psychiatric condition which adversely impacts the employee's
ability to perform his or her duties.

53.2 Whenever possible, an employee shall be advised in writing of the basis for the existence
of "reasonable cause" and the grounds thereof before being directed to report to any
such examination. In any case, such written notice is to be provided within 48 hours of
such an examination.

53.3 Any psychiatric report to the City shall consist of the psychiatrist's ultimate conclusion as
to the employee's fitness to serve and return to work date, if any. If the psychiatrist
believes that the employee is not fit for duty he or she may also supply a brief non-
intrusive analysis as it relates to the employee's ability to perform his or her duties. The
psychiatrist shall respect the physician-patient privilege in all other regards and shall not,
without the employee's written permission, release any other information, documents,
reports or conclusions to the City.

53.4 Failure to report for a medical or psychiatric examination under this section may
constitute grounds for discipline under Section 37.

SECTION 54: YMCA MEMBERSHIP

The City shall offer employees a low cost group membership in the Berkeley YMCA. The
amount the City contributes toward the employee’s monthly membership fee is subject to federal
and state income tax withholding. The City of Berkeley or its Claims Administrator may not be
liable for any injury which arises out of a City of Berkeley employee's participation in and use of
a YMCA membership.

SECTION 55: PARKING

The City agrees to continue to provide 33 parking spaces for sworn employees. The parties
recognize that construction in the downtown area will result in the relocation of the spaces from
time to time. If relocation becomes necessary, the City agrees that all 33 spaces will remain
within their current proximity. The parties recognize their mutual obligation to meet and confer
and reach an agreement which meet the interests of each party.

Page 50
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

ARTICLE 8
CALIFORNIA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM

SECTION 56: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM

56.1

56.2

56.3

56.4

56.5

56.6

56.7

Participation: The City shall continue participating under the Safety Members Plan of
the California Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS).

“Classic Employees” Definition: Classic Employees are defined as current employees
and future employees who do not qualify as a “New Member” under the California Public
Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA).

“New Members” Definition: New Members are defined in the Public Employees’
Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA), Government Code Section 7522.04(f).

CalPERS Retirement Formula for New Members as Defined Under the Public
Employees’ Pension Reform Act of 2013 (PEPRA): “New Members” as defined by
PEPRA who are hired by the City on or after January 1, 2013 shall be entitled to the 2.7%
at age 57 retirement formula with highest three (3) year average final compensation as
set forth in PEPRA.

CalPERS Retirement Formula for Classic Employees Hired on or After November
27, 2012 (current employees and employees who do not qualify as “New Members”
under PEPRA): Current employees or former City of Berkeley employees who were
members of CalPERS while employed with the City and had membership with CalPERS
prior to December 31, 2012 and who are rehired on or after November 27, 2012 and
other employees who do not qualify as “new Members” under PEPRA shall be entitled to
or continue to be entitled to the 3% at age 55 retirement formula as provided in Section
21363.1, with highest three years average final compensation as provided in Section
20037.

CalPERS Retirement Formula for Classic Employees Hired Before November 27,
2012: Employees hired before November 27, 2012 shall continue to be entitled to the 3%
at age 50 retirement formula as provided in Section 21362.2 (July 7, 2002), with highest
One-Year Final Compensation as provided in Section 20042 (July 22, 1976).

Optional Benefits: For both Classic and New Members, the City’s contract with
CalPERS shall include the following optional benefits:

56.7.1 Post Retirement Survivor Allowance as provided in Sections 21624, 21626 and
21628 (March 1, 1973).

56.7.2 Post Retirement Survivor Allowance to Continue after Remarriage as provided in
Section 21635 (July 18, 1986).

56.7.3 Credit for Unused Sick Leave as provided in Section 20965 (June 26, 1988).

Page 51
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

56.8

56.9

56.7.4 1959 Survivor Benefits to Surviving Spouse at Age 60 as provided in Section
21580 (March 1, 1973).

56.7.5 Third Level of 1959 Survivor Benefits as provided in Section 21573 (November 28,
1996).

56.7.6 Fourth Level of 1959 Survivor Benefits as provided in Section 21574 (October 15,
1998).

56.7.7 Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2 Death Benefit as provided in Section 21548
(November 6, 1998).

56.7.8 Military Service Credit as Public Service as provided in Section 21024 (November
6, 1998).

Classic Employees’ Pension Contribution: Effective July 1, 1994, the City increased
the base salary of employees by nine percent (9%). Employees then assumed and shall
continue to assume an obligation to pay this 9% normal employee contribution retirement
to CalPERS. Employees also contributed three percent (3%) toward the City’s CalPERS
employer contribution rate via automatic payroll deduction on a pre-tax basis from July 1,
2012 through June 30, 2015. The City and Association agree that, effective January 1,
2016 employees will pay an additional 1% contribution to the City’s CalPERS employer
contribution rate via automatic payroll deduction. Effective July 1, 2016, employees will
pay an additional 1% contribution to the City’s CalPERS employer contribution rate via
automatic payroll deduction. The City shall designate such payments to the City’s
CalPERS employer contribution rate as an Employer Pickup as defined by Section
414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.

New Members’ Pension Contributions: New Members hired on or after January 1,
2013, shall pay 50% of the normal share of cost required by PEPRA. The City and
Association agree that, effective January 1, 2016, employees will pay an additional 1%
contribution to the City’s CalPERS employer contribution rate via automatic payroll
deduction. Effective July 1, 2016, employees will pay an additional 1% contribution to the
City’s CalPERS employer contribution rate via automatic payroll deduction. The City
shall designate such payments to the City’s CalPERS employer contribution rate as an
Employer Pickup as defined by Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.

Page 52
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

ARTICLE 9
LAYOFF PROCEDURE

SECTION 57: LAYOFF POLICY

This layoff policy for the City of Berkeley is intended to provide the maximum employment
protection to the City staff should a layoff become necessary. The policy also aims to minimize
the impact such a layoff might have on the City's affirmative action accomplishments.

57.1. Announcement of Layoff

57.1.1 The City Council, City Manager, and the Chief of Police shall make every
reasonable effort to manage and budget the City's resources effectively and to
plan for the delivery of City services in a manner which will avoid the necessity to
layoff career City employees. If a reduction in the work force for more than thirty
(30) calendar days is necessitated by, but not limited to, a material change in
duties and organization, adverse working conditions, return of employees from
leaves of absence, or shortage of work or funds, the City Manager shall notify the
Director of Human Resources of the intended action and the reason for the layoff.

57.1.2 Immediately following a decision which may involve the potential layoff of career
employees, the City Manager shall freeze all current vacancies in the Police
Department service in similar and related classifications to those likely to be
targeted for layoff, as well as all related full-time, benefited, of temporary (see
glossary) positions which are expected to last six (6) months or more, and notify
the department head that such current and anticipated vacancies will be frozen
until further notice in order to implement the provisions of Section 57.6.

57.2 Seniority Service Date

57.2.1 All service of persons in the employ of the City shall be counted toward the
establishment of an employee's City seniority service date, including, for example,
permanent, probationary, provisional, temporary (full-time and_ intermittent),
seasonal, and exempt employment, as well as leaves of absence for obligatory
military service while an employee with the City. Less than full-time service will be
consolidated in equivalences of full-time service for the purpose of establishing the
City seniority service date. Time off, or vacation or compensatory time forfeited in
lieu of time off, as a result of formal disciplinary action will be subtracted from the
rank seniority service date, however, such date(s) shall not affect any employee's
date(s) relative to bidding for shifts or vacation.

57.2.2 All service of persons in the employ of the City in a promotional rank above the
entry-level rank shall be counted toward the establishment of an employee's rank
seniority service date including only probationary and permanent service as well
as leaves of absence for obligatory military service while an employee of the City.
Less than full-time service will be consolidated in equivalences of full-time service
for the purpose of establishing the rank seniority service date. Time off as a result
of disciplinary action will be subtracted from the rank seniority service date.

Page 53
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

57.3

57.4

57.2.3 All time spent in an appointed rank shall be credited to the employee's service in
the employee's permanent rank. In computing both City and rank seniority, all
time spent on paid leaves of absences shall be included, and all time spent on
unpaid leaves of absence in excess of two consecutive payroll periods shall be
excluded.

57.2.4 The Human Resources Department will maintain up-to-date and current City and
rank seniority service dates for all City employees holding probationary and
permanent appointments.

Establishment of Seniority Lists

57.3.1 Whenever a layoff of one or more career employees becomes necessary, as
defined above, such layoffs shall be made according to City-wide classification
seniority lists. Upon receiving notification that the City Manager must proceed with
a possible reduction in the work force and following receipt of information
concerning the specific positions, programs, and departments involved, the
Human Resources Department will immediately establish separate probationary
and permanent seniority lists for each classification targeted for layoff.

57.3.2The names of all City employees holding permanent and_ probationary
appointments in a given classification will be listed on the appropriate list in
descending order by City seniority service date in the entry-level position and by
rank seniority service date in promotional positions. Except as provided in Section
57.4 below, employees on all lists shall be laid off on the basis of their seniority
service dates (i.e., employees with the least amount of total service shall be laid
off first). All emergency, temporary, and provisional employees working in
classifications similar to those identified for layoff must be terminated prior to the
layoff of probationary or permanent employees. Employees on the probationary
seniority list for a specific classification will be laid off prior to employees on the
permanent seniority list for that class.

57.3.3 Probationary or permanent employees temporarily acting out of classification and
holding a provisional appointment in another classification will only be listed on a
seniority list of the class in which they hold permanent or probationary status
targeted for layoff.

57.3.4 If two (2) or more employees on a seniority list have identical seniority service
dates, the tie shall be broken based on established departmental procedures for
awarding commission numbers in such instances.

Employee Retreat Rights
57.4.1 Before an employee with permanent or probationary status may be released from
employment with the City of Berkeley, the Human Resources Department must

consider the employee's right to retreat to lower-level classifications through which
he or she was originally promoted or any subsequently created intermediate-level

Page 54
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

57.5

career classification series. Retreat rights shall also extend to employees who
have not previously been promoted through a classification but for whom the
classification is a natural progression or beginning in the classification series.

57.4.2In the process of retreating, the rank seniority date list shall be utilized.
Employees with the least amount of rank seniority shall retreat first; provided,
however, that a retreat from any rank below the employee's current rank shall be
based on a rank seniority date which is derived from a combination of all credited
service in the rank to which the employee has retreated and all credited service in
higher ranks held on a probationary or permanent Identification Expert will be
available only to employees who have previously held such ranks on a permanent
or probationary basis. There shall be no retreat rights to appointed ranks or
positions.

57.4.3 If an employee is qualified for retreat into more than one classification with
comparable salary ranges or if a vacancy exists in a classification to which an
employee is entitled to retreat, the options shall be discussed with the employee,
and due consideration shall be given to the employee's preferences. However, it is
the prerogative of the City Manager to determine the final placement offer to the
employee.

57.4.4 The retreating employee has a right to be retained in the highest salary range
possible which is equal to or less than his or her present salary range. An
employee involved in layoff does not have a right of mandatory placement to
positions with a higher salary range, i.e., promotion.

Employee Notification

57.5.1 Emergency, temporary, intermittent, seasonal, etc., employees shall be notified
individually, in writing, of pending layoff as soon as possible, but no definite time
period is required. However, at least two (2) weeks notification is desirable, if
possible.

57.5.2 Provisional employees shall be notified individually, in writing, of pending layoff as
soon as possible, with no less than fifteen (15) calendar days notification if
targeted for release or reassignment.

57.5.3 Permanent, probationary, and career-exempt employees should be notified
individually, in writing, of pending layoffs as soon as possible, with no less than
thirty (30) calendar days notification if targeted for release, reassignment, or
retreat. Notice to an employee absent from work for any reason shall be sent by
United States Mail, return receipt requested.

If an employee fails to accept a bona fide offer of reassignment or retreat in writing
within five (5) calendar days after receipt of the offer, the employee forfeits further
right to employment retention. Acceptance of a reassignment or retreat does not
remove the right of appeal under Section 57.9.

Page 55
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

57.6

57.7

Flexible Placement Program

57.6.1 In order to minimize the negative impact of a layoff, the City Manager will, as
previously stated in Section 57.1, impose a city-wide freeze on all appropriate
vacancies as soon as it has been determined that a layoff of career City
employees may be necessary.

57.6.2 Following the release of all emergency, temporary, and provisional employees in
classes similar to those targeted for layoff and as soon as employees targeted for
layoff or retreat have been identified and the provisions under Section 57.3 and
57.4 have been carried out, the Human Resources Department will review and
identify the frozen vacant classifications into which employees ultimately targeted
for layoff may be placed on the basis of total experience and education. In making
this decision, a waiver of minimum qualification standards and/or the substitution
of related experience and education may be made with an understanding on the
part of management and supervisory personnel that adequate on-the-job training,
which can be completed within no more than six (6) months, will be provided to
facilitate job adjustment and to compensate for the waiver of qualification
standards, if that has occurred.

57.6.3 Assignments under the Flexible Placement Program shall be limited to positions in
the same or lesser salary range as the classification from which the employee is to
be laid off.

57.6.4 Offers to positions under the Flexible Placement Program shall be made according
to City seniority service date and in accordance with the probationary and
permanent seniority list certification process outlined in Section 57.3. All offers
and placements made under this provision of the layoff policy shall be documented
in detail, with records available for audit and review at all times.

57.6.5 If an employee fails to accept a bona fide written offer of an alternative job within
five (5) calendar days after receipt of the offer, he or she forfeits further rights to
employment retention. Acceptance of an alternative job under the Flexible
Placement Program in no way jeopardizes an employee's standing on the
reemployment priority lists on which his or her name has been placed in
accordance with Section 57.7.

Reemployment Lists

57.7.1 The names of all probationary and permanent employees released or retreated
from positions in the competitive service as a result of layoff or retreat must be
placed on reemployment priority lists for those classifications from which the
employee was removed, as well as all other classifications to which they have
retreat rights in accordance with Section 57.4.

57.7.2 The reemployment priority list for employees who were laid off shall remain in

effect for three (3) years. Said list shall remain in effect indefinitely for employees
who were retreated.

Page 56
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

57.8

57.9

57.7.3 Departments with vacancies in any classification for which there is an active
reemployment priority list must use the reemployment priority list to fill their
positions and may not use any other recruitment or appointment method to fill a
vacancy until appropriate reemployment lists have been exhausted.

56.8.4 When a vacancy occurs in a class for which there is a reemployment priority list,
the name of the employee on the appropriate reemployment priority list with the
highest seniority date shall be certified to the selecting official. Employees so
certified from the reemployment priority list must be appointed to the existing
vacancy.

57.7.5 If a former employee fails to accept a bona fide written offer of reemployment
within five (5) calendar days, his or her name will be removed permanently from
the reemployment priority list from which the offer was made. Failure to accept an
offer to reemployment to the class with the highest salary range for which the
employee is eligible for reemployment will result in automatic removal from all
reemployment priority lists. However, the employee may decline (or accept)
reemployment to lower salary range classifications without jeopardizing his or her
standing on the reemployment priority list for the classification from which he or
she was original terminated.

57.7.6 Upon reappointment to the classification from which the employee was originally
separated or demoted, the employee has the right to be placed at the step of the
salary range which the employee held at the time of layoff or demotion.

Career-Exempt Employees: Only those employees holding full-time, benefited, exempt
positions who, in the past, have achieved permanent status and have been continuously
employed without a break in service between their career and exempt appointment, have
the right to retreat to previously held career classifications, placement on the
reemployment priority lists, and all other provisions governing layoff procedures. For the
purpose of layoff, such employees shall be referred to as "career-exempt."

Appeal Procedures

Any permanent, probationary, or career-exempt employee who is laid off, demoted, or
reassigned as a result of layoff and who believes that the layoff procedure has been
administered in violation of the terms of this agreement as it pertains to the employee's
case may appeal the action under the grievance procedure, including that provision
relating to non-disciplinary arbitration. In addition, employees may at all times before,
during, and subsequent to layoff review all records, including seniority lists,
reemployment priority lists, documentation pertaining to appointments under the Flexible
Placement Program, etc., which pertain to their classification and their rights under the
provisions of the layoff policy.

Page 57
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association
57.10 Audit
57.10.1 On an annual basis, the City Manager's Office shall order an audit by an

outside auditor of all vacant positions filled in each department and authorized
positions which have not been filled to determine whether the vacancies occurred
in classifications for which reemployment priority lists were in existence and, if so,
whether the appointments made by the selecting official were in accordance with
the procedures outlined in Section 57.7. In the event vacancies for which
reemployment priority lists are in existence remain unfilled, the auditor shall offer
an opinion as to whether or not the reasons for leaving the positions vacant
appear to be legitimate. A report of the audit must be transmitted to the City
Manager and the City Council.

57.10.2 If it is determined that a vacancy has been filled by a non-reemployment
priority list eligible in a classification for which a reemployment priority list existed
which included available applicants at the time, the former employee with
reemployment rights shall be hired and given retroactive pay from the date that the
vacancy occurred. The employee who was originally to fill the vacancy shall
continue to be retained in City employment.

Page 58
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

City of Berkeley

Berkeley Police Association

SIGNATURE PAGE

This Memorandum of Understanding is executed this day of

, 2015, by the

employer-employee relations representatives whose signatures appear below for their respective

organizations.

FOR THE BERKELEY POLICE

FOR THE CITY OF BERKELEY

 

Rockne A. Lucia, Jr., Rains Lucia Stern, PC

Dee Williams-Ridley, Interim City Manager

 

Chris Stines, Negotiator, Berkeley Police
Association

Edward L. Kreisberg, Principal
Meyers | Nave

 

Marc Dinkins, Negotiator, Berkeley Police
Association

Rebecca Chen, Associate Human

Resources Analyst

 

Emily Murphy, Negotiator, Berkeley Police
Association

Michael Meehan, Police Chief

 

Robert Rittenhouse, Negotiator, Berkeley
Police Association

Megan Schaefer, Negotiator, Berkeley
Police Association

Margarita Zamora, Acting Employee
Relations Manager

Page 59
 

 

City of Berkeley

2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

Berkeley Police Association

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXHIBIT A
Regular Monthly Salaries
JOB | REP At | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP
CODE | UNIT | CLASSIFICATION TITLE | FLsa | oT A B c D E
81480 | E | Police Captain E | at_| 13,401 | 13,849 | 14,307 | 14,787 | 15,279
81470 | F | Police Lieutenant N_ | ot | 11,697 | 12,083 | 12,485 | 12,895 | 13,328
81400 | F | Police Officer (Steps A-E) | N [oT] 7,736 | 8,096 | 8,473 | 8,747 | 9,030
81400 | F | Police Officer (Steps F-G) | N [oT | 9,326 | 9,628
81420 FE Police Sergeant N OT | _ 9,753 | 10,074 | 10,404 | 10,748 | 11,104
Regular Monthly Salaries Effective July 1, 2016
One Percent (1%) Cost of Living Adjustment
JoB | REP AL | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP
cope | UNIT | CLASSIFICATION TITLE | FLsa | oT A B c D E
81480 | E | Police Captain E__| at | 13,535 | 13,987 | 14,450 | 14,935 | 15,432
81470 | F | Police Lieutenant n_ | ot | 11,813 | 12,204 | 12,610 | 13,024 | 13,461
81400 | F | Police Officer (Steps A-E) | _N | oT | 7,813| 8,177| 8,558 | 8,834| 9,120
81400 FE Police Officer (Steps F-G) N OT | 9,419 | 9,724
81420 F Police Sergeant N OT | 9,851 | 10,175 | 10,508 | 10,855 | 11,215
Regular Monthly Salaries Effective January 1, 2017
One (1%) Cost of Living Adjustment
Jop_| REP at | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP
CODE | UNIT | CLASSIFICATION TITLE | FLSA | OT A B c D E
81480 | E | Police Captain E_ | at | 13,670 | 14,127 | 14,595 | 15,084 | 15,586
81470 FE Police Lieutenant N OT 11,93 | 12,326 | 12,736 | 13,154 | 13,596
81400 | F | Police Officer (Steps A-E) | N [oT | 7,891 | 8,259] 8,643] 8,923] 9,212
81400 FE Police Officer (Steps F-G) N OT | 9,513 | 9,822
81420 FE Police Sergeant N OT 9,949 | 10,276 | 10,613 | 10,964 | 11,327

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 60
City of Berkeley

‘DAY SHIFT
0600-1600
Mon, Tue, Wed, Thur
12 omeers Eary Cut @ 0530)

geeeereeeee ff

 

 

aEHseoeNG

gga

 

 

‘EARLY SWING
1100-2100

‘Sergeant
Sergeant

Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer
Officer

 

imam 38999 (8)

2014 — 2017 Memorandum of Understanding

Exhibit B

 

|4.10/3.1212 74 OFFICER DEPLOYMENT - 18 BEATS|

 

 

[ tenes il

LATE SWING
1530-0130

 

  

peeereeee’ ff

imum Sesing 8

‘Teatning atm Ft

Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu | |Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu
(mur omcers cate ou @1850)

Berkeley Police Association

 

 

 

 

 

 

"NIGHT SHIFT ‘DAY SHIFT ‘SWING SHIFT ‘NIGHT SHIFT
2030-0630 0600-1830 1130-0000 1800-0630
Fri, Sat, Sun Fri, Sa, Sun Fri, Sat, Sun
| omcers Ear Out @ 0530)
Sergeant Sergeant Officer 1 ‘Sergeant
Sergeant ‘Sergeant Offcer 5 Sergeant
Offcer 9
BEAT BEAT| Offer 13 BEAT
Offer 1 Officer 2 Offer 17 Officer 2
Offer 3 Officer 4 Officer 4
Offoer 5 Officer 6 Officer 6
Offcer 7 Offcer 8] | 1400-0230 Officer 8
Offer 8 Offcer 10 | Fri, Sat Sun Ofce 10
Officer 1" Officer 12] Oficer 12
Officer 13 Offcer 14] | Sergeant Officer 14
Officer 15 Offcer 16 Offcer 3 Ofcer 18
Offcer 7 Officer Offcer 7 Ofer 18
Officer SW Officer = SW] Offer tt Ofcer SW
Offcer SW Officer SW] Offer 18 Officer SW)
Officer
nena amg (3) imum Steg (3) Mma SBIMPG EAA) Minimum Stang)
rium State $8 (6)
Jet Tma Tw: Saoke 2g TRuTME SaokA aed Thu TMS Back
‘rating are Tha ‘Training tet Tas “Training 2n6 Ths ‘Training Sr Thu

Page 61
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

EXHIBIT C
GLOSSARY

Allocation: The assignment of a single position to the proper class in accordance with the duties
performed, and the authority and responsibilities exercised.

Classification (class): A group of positions sufficiently similar in respect to their duties and
responsibilities that: (a) the same descriptive title may be used with clarity to designate each
position allocated to the class; (b) the same minimum requirements as to education, experience,
knowledge, ability and other qualifications may be required of all incumbents; (c) the same tests of
fitness may be used to choose qualified employees and, (d) the same schedule of compensation
can be made to apply with equity under the same employment conditions.

Career Employee: An employee who is appointed to a position in the competitive service and
who has a probationary or permanent appointment with the City of Berkeley.

Continuous Testing: An examination process in which applications are accepted on a
continuous basis, not subject to a closing date with a viable list maintained at all times.

Demotion: The movement of an employee from one class to another class having a lower
maximum rate of pay.

Domestic Partner: A person residing with and sharing the common necessities of life with a City
of Berkeley employee, where both intend to continue this arrangement indefinitely. They are
unmarried; at least eighteen (18) years of age; not related by blood closer than would bar marriage
in the State of California, and mentally competent to consent to contracts.

Employee: A person who has been legally appointed under the City of Berkeley Personnel
Ordinance and the Personnel Rules and Regulations, who is on the City payroll and whose
employment has not been terminated and whose position is included in this representation unit.

Flexing of Shifts (aka Offsetting of Overtime): Changing of hours of work to avoid the payment
of overtime.

Full-Time: An assignment of forty hours per week; a full-time employee works an assignment of
forty hours per week or a combination of assignments totaling forty hours per week.

High Risk Classifications: A group of positions whose duties and responsibilities present: (a)
significant probability or chance of injury, damage or loss of life; (b) exposure to risk and; (c) ability
to incur the risk.

Impasse: "Impasse" means that the City and the Association have a dispute over matters within
the scope of representation and have reached a point in meeting and negotiating over the dispute
at which their differences in positions are so substantial or prolonged that future meetings would be
futile.

Page 62
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

Jury Duty Period: The period of time from which an employee appears in court as required by
law to serve on an inquest jury or trial jury until such time as the employee is discharged from such
service by the court. "Jury Duty Period" expressly covers only that period of time spent by the
employee in service of the court as a juror and does not include any time spent in court by the
employee as a result of being a party to the action, being a witness to the action, or being
subpoenaed to testify in the action.

Lateral Entry: Recruitment and selection status of candidates who have successfully completed
P.O.S.T. academy training and meet the minimum requirement for Police Officer-Lateral
classification.

Position: A grouping of duties and responsibilities which constitute a single assignment which is
in a classification covered by this Memorandum of Understanding.

Promotion: The movement of an employee from one class to another class having a higher
maximum rate of pay.

Promotional Examination: An examination for promotion to a class in the competitive service in
which participation is limited to current employees with permanent status and/or to former
permanent or probationary employees who are on current mandatory reemployment lists of layoff.

Provisional: A career employee who is temporarily serving in a higher level or unclassified
position as a temporary assignment, pending examination, classification, or in the absence of the
permanent incumbent.

Reclassification: Reallocation of a position from one classification to another classification based
upon consideration of the kind and level of assigned duties and responsibilities.

Reemployment: Reappointment of a former probationary or permanent employee to a vacant
position who has been laid off under Section 55.7 of the Layoff section in this Understanding.

Regular Hourly Salary: The Regular Monthly Salary multiplied by twelve (12) months and divided
by 2080 annual work hours.

Regular Monthly Salary: The base pay for a classification (as included in Exhibit A of this
Understanding).

Reinstatement: Appointment to a vacant position of a former probationary or permanent
employee, within two years of the termination date, without obtaining new eligibility through
examination. Reinstatement is not mandatory and a former employee must request consideration
in writing. Eligibility for reinstatement is no guarantee of appointment and former probationary
employees who did not obtain permanent status must complete their probationary period in
accordance with Section 32.

Rejection (Probation): The separation of any employee from the service before the completion of
the probationary period.

Page 63
2014 - 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
City of Berkeley Berkeley Police Association

Release Time: Paid time off permitted employees, during their scheduled hours of work, to
perform Association activities as provided by this Memorandum of Understanding. This paid time
off is in addition to the employee paid leave and is subject to the conditions of the applicable
sections of this Understanding.

Termination: The separation of an employee from the service of the City. Termination may
include death, discharge, layoff, resignation, retirement, and work completion.

Transfer: The movement of any employee from one position to another within the same class in
another department or the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a
comparable level of duties and responsibilities and the same maximum rate of pay.

Vacation Year: A period that annually commences at the close of the last City pay period for
which the payday falls in March. For example, if paychecks were issued on March 27 to pay
employees for the pay period running from March 8 until March 21, the next vacation year would
commence on March 22.

Y-Rate: An employee occupying a position which is reallocated to a class, the maximum salary for
which is less than the incumbent's present salary or occupying a position in a class the salary rate
or range for which is reduced, shall continue to receive his or her present salary. Such salary shall
be designated as a Y-rate and when that employee vacates this position, it shall be filled in
accordance with new salary range established. Y-rating shall not apply to employees who are
demoted for just cause, including unacceptable level of performance, or as a result of demotion
under the provisions of the Layoff policy.

Page 64
Attachment 2

RESOLUTION NO. ##,###-N.S.

APPROVE A NEW CLASSIFICATION AND SALARY RESOLUTION FOR THE
BERKELEY POLICE ASSOCIATION AND RESCINDING RESOLUTION NO. 63,961-
N.S.

WHEREAS, the City Council has approved a new three-year Memorandum of
Understanding with the Berkeley Police Association which includes cost of living
adjustments; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the City Council to adopt a new Classification and Salary
Resolution to reflect the salary adjustments reflected in the new Memorandum of
Understanding.

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Council of the City of Berkeley adopts
a new Classification and Salary Resolution for employees in Representation Units E
(sworn, managerial employees in the Police Department), and Representation Unit F
(sworn, non-managerial employees in the Police Department) effective July 6, 2014
through June 30, 2017 to incorporate changes to the salary schedule as shown in
Exhibit A (July 1, 2016); and Exhibit B (July 1, 2017), attached hereto and made a part
hereof.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that Resolution No. 63,961-N.S. is hereby rescinded.

Exhibits
A: Berkeley Police Association Classification/Salary Resolution Period: July 1,
2016 through December 31, 2016
B: Berkeley Police Association Classification/Salary Resolution Period: January
1, 2017 through June 30, 2017
EXHIBIT A

Salary Ranges in Effect from July 1, 2016 through December 31, 2016
(1.0% Cost of Living Adjustment)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

JOB REP AL | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP
CODE | UNIT | CLASSIFICATION TITLE | FLSA | OT A B c D E
81480 E Police Captain E AL_| 13,535 | 13,987 | 14,450 | 14,935 | 15,432
81470 E Police Lieutenant N OT | 11,813 | 12,204 | 12,610 | 13,024 | 13,461
81400 E Police Officer (Steps A-E) N OT | 7,813 | 8,177 | 8,558] 8,834 | 9,120
81400 FE Police Officer (Steps F-G) N OT | 9,419 | 9,724
81420 F Police Sergeant N OT | 9,851 | 10,175 | 10,508 | 10,855 | 11,215

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
EXHIBIT B

Salary Ranges in Effect from January 1, 2017 through June 30, 2017
One (1%) Cost of Living Adjustment

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

JOB | REP AL | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP | STEP
CODE | UNIT | CLASSIFICATION TITLE | FLSA | OT A B c D E
81480 E Police Captain E AL_| 13,670 | 14,127 | 14,595 | 15,084 | 15,586
81470 E Police Lieutenant N OT 11,93 | 12,326 | 12,736 | 13,154 | 13,596
81400 EF Police Officer (Steps A-E) N OT | 7,891 | 8,259 | 8,643 | 8,923] 9,212
81400 FE Police Officer (Steps F-G) N OT | 9,513 | 9,822
81420 FE Police Sergeant N OT 9,949 | 10,276 | 10,613 | 10,964 | 11,327

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
