 

The Riverside Police Officer’s Association
and
The City of Riverside

 

Memorandum
Of
Understanding
Supervisory Unit
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE REPRESENTATIVES OF MANAGEMENT FOR
THE CITY OF RIVERSIDE
AND
RIVERSIDE POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION
(POLICE SUPERVISORY UNIT)

PREAMBLE

The purpose of this document is to set forth the full terms and conditions of employment
for the Police Supervisory Unit for the term of July 1, 2006 through June 30, 2009. This
consolidated Memorandum of Understanding is entered into with reference to the
following facts:

Representatives of Management for the City of Riverside (hereafter "City") and
representatives of the Riverside Police Officers' Association (hereafter "Association" or
"RPOA") have met on a number of occasions and have conferred in good faith
exchanging proposals concerning wages, hours, fringe benefits and other terms and
conditions of employment of non-management employee-members in the Police
Supervisory Unit represented by the Association.
ARTICLE 1

ARTICLE 2

SECT!

SECT!

SECT!

SECT!
SECT!
SECT!

SECT!

SECT!
SECT!
SECT!
SECT!
SECT!

ARTICLE 3
SECT!
SECT!

SECT!

 

SECT!

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

RECOGNITION CLAUSE

PAY PRACTICES

ON 2.1
2.1.2
ON 2.2
ON 2.3
2.3.2
2.3.3
ON 2.4
ON 2.5
ON 2.6
2.6.1
2.6.2
ON 2.7
2.7.1
2.7.2
2.7.3
ON 2.8
ON 2.9
ON 2.10
ON 2.11
ON 2.12

GENERAL PAY

Sergeant increases equal to Police Unit

STEP PROGRESSION

EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE

Intermediate Certificate

Advanced Certificate

BILINGUAL PAY

ASSIGNMENT PREMIUM PAY

FIELD TRAINING OFFICER (FTO) PREMIUM PAY
FTO Sergeant premium pay for program assignment
FTO Sergeant premium pay for training trainee
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

Police Sergeant Shift-Diff pay

Assignments to watches not special assignments
Motors, Metro, and PACT included

ACTING WATCH COMMANDER

DEFERRED COMPENSATION

TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

SERGEANT’S ADMINISTRATIVE TIME
COMMUNITY POLICING INCENTIVE

HOURS AND OVERTIME

ON 3.1
ON 3.2
3.2.1
3.2.2
ON 3.3
3.3.1
3.3.2
3.3.3
3.3.4
ON 3.4
3.4.1
3.4.2
3.4.3
3.4.4
3.4.5
3.4.7

SECTION 3.5

3.5.1
3.5.2

PAYMENT FOR OVERTIME

4-10 PROGRAM

Meal Periods

Exclusions

COMPENSATORY TIME

Banking overtime hours is at the election of the employee
Comp time cap

Comp time cash out

December pay down

COURT TIME

2 hour minimum

2 hour minimum when more than 1 hour before shift
Overtime pay beyond two hours

Court overtime less than 1 hour before shift

Court overtime that extends beyond regular shift
Moreno Valley Court

ON-CALL

On-Call pay rate

On-Call response within 60 minutes of notification

3
 

 

3.5.3 On-Call pay for Sergeant’s who have subordinates on call
SECTION 3.6 SHIFT CHANGE
ARTICLE 4 GENERAL PERSONNEL PROVISIONS
SECTION 4.1 SERGEANT PEER INVESTIGATIONS PROHIBITED
SECTION 4.2 TAKE HOME CARS
SECTION 4.3 SERGEANT CALLED IN FOR WORK MEETING
SECTION 4.4 UNIFORMS
4.4.1 City to provide uniforms and safety equipment
4.4.2 SWAT gear provided
ARTICLE 5 LEAVE PROVISIONS
SECTION 5.1 HOURS PER PAY PERIOD ACCRUAL FOR SICK LEAVE
SECTION 5.2 FAMILY SICK LEAVE
SECTION 5.3 SICK LEAVE PAYOUT
SECTION 5.4 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
SECTION 5.5 MILITARY LEAVE
SECTION 5.6 LEAVE OF ABSENCE
SECTION 5.7 RELEASE TIME
SECTION 5.8 ADMINISTRATIVE TIME
ARTICLE 6 VACATION
SECTION 6.1 POLICY
SECTION 6.2 VACATION SCHEDULE
SECTION 6.3 ANNUAL VACATION BUY DOWN
ARTICLE 7 HOLIDAYS
SECTION 7.1 JULY 7, 1970 MOU TERMS
SECTION 7.2 HOLIDAYS OBSERVED
SECTION 7.3 ELECTION DAY NOT A HOLIDAY
SECTION 7.4 OBSERVANCE OF HOLIDAYS
7.4.1 Uniformed Services
7.4.2 Non-Uniformed Services
SECTION 7.5 HOLIDAY TIME CREDIT
7.5.1 Holiday day off
7.5.2 Holiday bank
ARTICLE 8 EMPLOYEE INSURANCE
SECTION 8.1 MEDICAL / DENTAL
8.11 Medical / Dental premium amounts paid by City
8.1.2 Contribution amounts for medical and dental
8.1.3 City discontinuance of health insurance plans
8.1.4 Contributions do not apply to third payroll in any one month

4
SECTION 8.2

LIFE INSURANCE

8.2.1 Term life insurance plan
8.2.2 Sergeants term life insurance plan
SECTION 8.3 LONG TERM DISABILITY
8.3.1 City contribution
8.3.2 Sergeant's choice for LTD or Deferred Comp
ARTICLE 9 RETIREMENT
SECTION 9.1 RETIREMENT PLAN
9.1 City to pay employee contribution to PERS
9.1.2 One year highest compensation
9.1.3 Final year 9% bump
9.1.4 3% @ 50
9.1.5 1957 Survivor Benefit
9.1.6 1959 Survivors Benefit
SECTION 9.2 DEFERRED COMPENSATION
SECTION 9.3 HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR RETIREES
SECTION 9.4 HEALTH INSURANCE FUND FOR RETIREES (1991 Plan)
9.4.2.1 $75 per month for prior June 1°‘ 1990 retirees
9.4.2.2 $150 per month for post June 1° 1990 retirees
9.4.2.4 Eligibility requirements
9.4.2.5 Spouse of retiree
9.4.2.6 Maximum base salary exclusion
9.4.2.7 Health coverage exclusion
9.4.2.8 Re-admission into the program
9.4.2.9 Augmentation of the Fund
9.4.2.14 Transfer of the Fund
9.4.3 Enrollment provisions for post 1991 hires
SECTION 9.5 RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE FUND (2006 Plan)
9.5.1 City contribution amount Sept. 2006 to Dec. 2007
9.5.2 City contribution amount Jan. 2008
9.5.3 Benefit qualifications
9.5.4 Audit
ARTICLE 10 ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING OR SCHOOLS
SECTION 10.1 ADO WITH 28 DAYS NOTICE
SECTION 10.2 ADO SCHEDULING
SECTION 10.3 OVERTIME FOR UNUSED ADO’S
SECTION 10.4 28 DAY WORK PERIODS IDENTIFIED
SECTION 10.5 FAILURE TO PROVIDE 28 DAY NOTICE
SECTION 10.6 28 DAY NOTICE WAIVER
SECTION 10.7 MEET AND CONFER WAIVER
SECTION 10.8 ADHERENCE TO PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 11 TRANSFERS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT

SECTION 11.1 MEET AND CONFER REGARDING TRANSFER POLICY

ARTICLE 12 PROMOTION AND RECLASSIFICATION
SECTION 12.2 SERGEANT PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
12.2.5 Standardized written test
12.2.6 Outside oral interview board
12.2.7 Data fact sheet
12.2.8 Certification

12.2.8.5 List valid for one year
SECTION 12.3 RECLASSIFICATION POLICY

ARTICLE 13 PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
ARTICLE 14 DRUG TESTING
ARTICLE 15 REPLACEMENT OF PERSONAL ITEMS
15.1 Reimbursement for lost / stolen items
15.2 Required for job but not provided
15.3 Items lost or damaged on duty
15.4 Not to exceed $100 per year
15.6 Does not apply to weapons or vehicles
ARTICLE 16 GREIVANCE PROCEDURES

SECTION 16.1 PURPOSE
SECTION 16.2 DEFINITION
SECTION 16.3 POLICY
SECTION 16.4 PROCEDURE

ARTICLE 17 AGENCY SHOP
ARTICLE 18 NO CONCERTED ACTIVITIES
ARTICLE 19 PROVISIONS BY LAW
APPENDIX A

SALARY SCHEDULES
APPENDIX B

EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM

APPENDIX C
TRANSFER OF RETIREMENT FUND
APPENDIX D
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING JULY 7, 1970
ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION CLAUSE

Pursuant to the provision of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act, Government Code Section
3500, et seq., the City of Riverside recognizes the Riverside Police Officers’ Association
as the exclusive bargaining representative of the employees in certain sworn safety
ranks employed by the Riverside Police Department hereinafter the ‘Supervisory Unit’

as follows:

Supervisory Unit Included:

Excluded:

ARTICLE 2:

Section 2.1

Section 2.2

Police Sergeant

All other sworn safety ranks, Police Officer, Police
Detective,, Police Pilot, all civilian employees,
management, confidential employees, and part-time
employees.

PAY PRACTICES

GENERAL PAY

2.1.1

2.1.2

Effective as of the payroll periods hereinafter set forth,
the salary ranges for the classifications of the
employee-members represented by the Association in
the Police Supervisory Unit shall be increased to the
nearest salary range in the City's salary rate schedule
as follows:

2.1.1.1 First_Year: FY 2006/2007. Salaries shall be

increased by 4% effective September 8, 2006.

2.1.1.2 Second Year: FY 2007/2008. Salaries shall be

increased by 4% effective July 1, 2007.

2.1.1.3 Third year: FY 2008/2009. Salaries shall be

increased by 3% effective July 1, 2008.

2.1.1.4 The basic salary schedules are attached as

Appendix A.

Salary and fringe benefit increases for Police Sergeants
will at least be equal to those received by the Police
Unit.

STEP PROGRESSION

2.2.1

The years of service requirement for eligibility for merit
increases on appointment or promotion are:

2.2.1.1 Step 1 to Step 2 - 6 months.
Section 2.3

Section 2.4

Section 2.5

Section 2.6

2.2.1.2 Each additional step within the range at one (1)
year intervals.

EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE

2.3.1 The City will grant all eligible unit members who qualify
the following amounts for having and/or obtaining an
Intermediate or Advanced Certificate from the
Commission on Peace Officers Standards & Training
(POST) of the State of California.

2.3.2 Intermediate Certificate - Seven and one-half percent
(7.5%) premium pay for those who possess a POST
Intermediate Certificate; or

2.3.3 Advanced Certificate — Twelve and one-half percent
(12.5%) premium pay for those who possess a POST
Advanced Certificate.

BILINGUAL PAY

The bilingual stipend shall be an additional three percent (3%) of
base salary.

ASSIGNMENT PREMIUM PAY

The assignment incentive pay for each employee serving in the
listed capacities shall be as follows:

Motorcycle Sergeant 3%
Metro Team Sergeant (Red Team) 3%
Collateral Metro Sergeant (Blue / White Team) 1.5%
Metro Sniper Team Sergeant 1.5%
Hostage Negotiation Team Sergeant 1.5%

The incentive pay calculation will be based off of the employee’s
base salary.

FIELD TRAINING OFFICER SERGEANT PREMIUM PAY

2.6.1 The Field Training Administrative Sergeant earns ten hours
of straight compensatory time for each month that they
supervise the Field Training Officer (FTO) program.

2.6.2 Field Training Sergeants earn ten hours of straight
compensatory time for each month that they supervise at
least one trainee.
Section 2.7

Section 2.8

Section 2.9

Section 2.10

SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL

2.7.1. Non-probationary Sergeants who are regularly assigned to
Watch A (Graveyard Shift) shall receive additional
compensation in the amount of $30 for each such shift; non-
probationary Sergeants who are regularly assigned to Watch
C (Swing Shift) shall receive additional compensation in the
amount of $22.50 for each such shift.

2.7.2 Under no circumstances shall assignments to Watches be
considered "special assignments." Shift differential applies to
employees classified as Police Sergeants.

2.7.3 Subject to the conditions described herein, shift differential
shall apply to sergeants assigned to Police Motorcycle Duty
("Motors"), Metro Unit ("Metro"), and Parole And Corrections
Team (“PACT’).

2.7.4 Police Motorcycle Duty ("Motors"), Metro Unit ("Metro"), and
Parole And Corrections Team (“PACT”) whose regularly
assigned shift begins at 12:00 p.m. are eligible for the Swing
shift differential. The foregoing language does not limit the
Department's latitude to adjust the shift starting times as
circumstances require.

ACTING WATCH COMMANDER

Sergeants acting as Watch Commander shall receive the full value
of top step Lieutenant pay.

DEFERRED COMPENSATION

The City will contribute $200 per month to Sergeants deferred
compensation plan.

If the Sergeant does not participate in the Long Term Disability
(LTD) program the City will contribute an additional $15 per month
to the City’s deferred compensation program for that Sergeant.

TUITION REIMBURSEMENT

Appendix B is Tuition Reimbursement excerpt

The City agrees to increase tuition reimbursement for Sergeants to
$500 to a maximum of $1,500 annually. The parties adopt the
present City Education Reimbursement Program for incorporation

herein, except that the program is not subject to final approval upon
the availability of budgeted funds. See Appendix B.

10
Section 2.11

Section 2.12

ARTICLE 3

Section 3.1

Section 3.2

SERGEANT'S ADMINISTRATIVE TIME

Sergeants shall be paid one-half hour at their normal overtime rate
for each day worked as compensation for roll call preparation.
Although the parties agree that such roll call preparation is
estimated to take an average of thirty minutes daily, there is no
requirement that a Sergeant arrive 42 hour early for each shift, or to
remain ¥% hour after the shift in order to receive this stipend. The
overtime is to be paid on top of (in addition to) other overtime hours
worked. The overtime is considered to begin at the Sergeant's
normally scheduled end of watch. All patrol Sergeants shall
receive this overtime for each shift worked.

COMMUNITY POLICING INCENTIVE

In recognition of RPD officers’ dedication to participating in
community events/activities, each employee will receive a one-time
payment of $1,800. The payment will be rendered upon contract
ratification and will be paid to employees on a check separate from
the employees regular payroll check.

HOURS AND OVERTIME
PAYMENT FOR OVERTIME

Overtime shall be compensated at one and one-half (1 4%) times
the employee’s regular hourly rate of pay for all hours worked
beyond an employee’s scheduled/normal shift. This is also referred
to as the “premium rate.”

4-10 PROGRAM

The regularly scheduled hours of work for all sworn personnel
classified as Police Sergeant shall be four (4) days per week, ten
(10) hours per day (the "4-10 program") subject to the conditions
below:

3.2.1 MEAL PERIODS
Employees assigned to uniformed and non-uniformed
services shall continue to be scheduled for the 4-10
program and their meal periods will continue to occur
during the ten hour shift.

3.2.2 EXCLUSIONS

Light duty assignments, special assignments and/or
major operations may be excluded from the 4-10
program at the discretion of the Chief, or designee. A

11
Section 3.3

Section 3.4

special assignment is one that is for a limited defined
duration, such as, for example, personnel and training,
and public information sergeant. Such schedules will be
determined by the Chief. Personnel applying for such
special assignments will be notified of the applicable
schedule prior to the time applications for the
assignment are due.

COMPENSATORY TIME

3.3.1

3.3.2

3.3.3

3.3.4

Banking overtime hours worked as compensatory time
or being paid as cash overtime is at the exclusive
election of the employee.

The cap for maximum accumulation of compensatory
time off for Sergeants shall be one-hundred forty hours
(140).

During the course of each year, employees shall have
the option of cashing out earned compensatory time,
with two weeks notice.

During each December, all accumulated compensatory
time shall be paid for in cash.

COURT TIME

3.4.1

3.4.2

3.4.3

3.4.4

The minimum compensation for court time shall be two
(2) hours at the applicable overtime rate.

On each occasion where an employee covered by this
agreement is required to appear in court in response to
an order or subpoena in relation to an incident or event
arising out of the course and scope of employment with
the City at a time outside of the employee's regularly
scheduled work shift, and an hour or more prior to the
commencement of the employee's regularly scheduled
work shift, such employee shall receive at least two (2)
hours overtime compensation at the applicable regular
rate of pay (ie., the premium rate).

If such court appearance lasts for more than two hours
of off-duty time, the employee shall receive overtime
compensation for the actual amount of all such off-duty
time at the premium rate.

In circumstances where the court appearance is
scheduled to commence less than one hour prior to the

12
Section 3.5

3.4.5

3.4.6

3.4.7

ON-CALL

3.5.1

3.5.2

beginning of the employee's regularly scheduled work
shift, the employee shall receive overtime
compensation at the premium rate for the entire period
between the scheduled commencement time of the
court appearance and the time the employee's shift is
scheduled to begin.

When an employee commences a court appearance
during the course of a regularly scheduled work shift
and the court appearance extends beyond the
scheduled expiration of that shift, the employee shall
receive overtime compensation at the premium rate for
the entire portion of the court appearance that extends
beyond the scheduled termination of the employee's
regular work shift.

Except as modified above, the existing practices,
procedures and policies regarding court appearances
and court time shall not be changed by this agreement
and will continue in full force and effect.

For purposes of providing appropriate overtime
compensation out of city travel to court, travel to and
from court in Moreno Valley shall be standardized at
thirty (30) minutes prior to the subpoena reporting time
and at thirty (30) minutes following the officer's release
from court, regardless of actual travel time.

An employee on call from the end of the regularly
scheduled work shift to the beginning of the next day's
regularly scheduled work shift shall be paid therefore at
the rate of one (1) hour straight time pay; four (4) hours
straight time pay shall be paid for each continuous
twenty-four (24) hours on call. This provision also
applies when an off duty unit member is on call for
court.

Employees in a paid on-call status are required to
promptly respond to the designated location and arrive
within a reasonable period of time after being notified to
respond. Reasonable response time shall be the time
required to get ready and then drive at normal speeds
to the designated duty location (including the need to
first stop at the station if necessary). Employees
subject to this provision must be able to arrive at the
designated duty location within 60 minutes of
notification.

13
Section 3.6

ARTICLE 4

Section 4.1

Section 4.2

Section 4.3

Section 4.4

3.5.2 Sergeants will receive pay equity to officer they
supervise in units which are on-call. In other words,
Sergeants who are placed in an on-call status shall or if
one or more members of the Sergeant's unit is on call,
the Sergeant shall receive like on-call pay for actual on-
call duty.

SHIFT CHANGE

The City reserves the right to replace the semi-annual shift change
with an annual shift change.

GENERAL PERSONNEL PROVISIONS
SERGEANT PEER INVESTIGATIONS PROHIBITED

Lieutenants will investigate Sergeants who initiate pursuits, use of
force, traffic collisions and the like, excluding investigations
conducted by Internal Affairs. There will no longer be peer-to-peer
investigations of sergeants by another Sergeant in such cases;
patrol lieutenants are to conduct these investigations.

TAKE HOME CARS

Non-uniformed sergeants take city-assigned vehicles home under
current practice as approved by the Chief of Police. The City will
continue to permit non-uniformed sergeants to take home City cars
under the present practice. The City recognizes that this matter is
subject to meet and confer should the City believe a change to the
practice is warranted. However, no re-opener is intended hereby.

SERGEANT CALLED IN FOR WORK MEETING

When a Sergeant is called in for a meeting between shifts or on
his/her day off, he or she shall receive a minimum of two hours’ pay
at the applicable rate. In the event the meeting lasts less than two
hours, the Department reserves the right to assign up to two hours’
work.

UNIFORMS

45.1 The City will provide required uniforms and safety
equipment.

4.1.1 4.5.2 SWAT gear — The City, in consultation with the

Red team Sergeant with respect to quality standards
and functionality, will procure and provide one set of
the following items to each Metro team member:

14
ARTICLE 5

Section 5.1

Section 5.2

Section 5.3

Uniform & Safety

Balaclava, Hatch #NH5000

2 Name tag, cloth

2 BDU pants

2 BDU Shirt

T-Shirt, Black w/ MFF emblem
HD Field Jacket

Nomex gloves

Boonie type hat

Leather rappel/fast rope gloves
Eye protection

Custom fit hearing protection
Knee pads

Handgun light

Flashlight

Tactical boots

Nylon under belt

Nylon cuff case

Nylon holster

Nylon keepers, set (4)

Nylon mag pouch, double
Nylon OC holder

Nylon radio holder

Nylon Sam Browne

Name tag, brass w/blk letters: METRO Team

LEAVE PROVISIONS

HOURS PER PAY PERIOD ACCRUAL FOR SICK LEAVE
Sick leave will accrue at the rate of 3.7 hours per pay period.
FAMILY SICK LEAVE

Employees may apply any accrued leave balances for family illness
or FMLA / CFRA. Family sick leave will be allowed only for the
sickness or injury of the spouse, child, mother, father, registered
domestic partner or child of domestic partner of the employee.
Covered family relationships are defined by law, and do not include
“in-laws.” There is no longer any requirement that the family
member live in the same household.

SICK LEAVE PAYOUT
Except as hereinafter provided, upon retirement or disability
retirement pursuant to City ordinance, or under the Public or State

Employees’ Retirement System or pursuant to the provisions of any
applicable agreement between the City and a State retirement

15
Section 5.4

system, or upon death, accumulated and unused sick leave credit
shall be paid on the following basis:

5.3.1

5.3.2

Every person who has been employed for a continuous
period of five years or more, but less than 10 years,
immediately preceding said retirement or disability
retirement shall receive payment comparable to twenty-
five percent of accumulated and unused sick leave, or
upon the death of every such person who has been so
employed for said continuous period immediately
preceding said employee's death the estate or
beneficiary of the deceased shall receive said payment.

Every person who has been employed for a continuous
period of ten years or more immediately preceding said
retirement or disability retirement shall receive payment
comparable to fifty percent (50%) of accumulated and
unused sick leave; or upon the death of every such
person who has been so employed for said continuous
period immediately preceding said employee's death,
the estate or beneficiary of the deceased shall receive
said payment.

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Every regular, full time employee who has been in the continuous
employ of the City shall receive bereavement leave as set forth in
table 5.6.6, which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by

reference.

5.4.1

5.4.2

All regular, full-time employees of the City, regardless
of period of service, may in the event of death of any
relative of the first degree by blood or marriage or any
relative with whom they reside within the same
household, or brother or sister, be allowed up to the
equivalent of one (1) work week of paid bereavement
leave. In the event of death of a relative of the second
degree, who does not reside within the same
household, paid bereavement leave for one (1) work
day may be granted.

Persons regularly employed between twenty to twenty-
nine hours per week may be granted one-half (1/2) of
the applicable leave and persons regularly employed
between thirty (30) to thirty-nine (39) hours per week
may be granted three-fourths (3/4) of the applicable
leave.

16
5.4.3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Relative Bereavement Time
Spouse 1 week
Child 1 week
Step-child 1 week
Parent 1 week
Step-parent 1 week
Mother-in-law 1 week
Father-in-law 1 week
Grandchild 1 day
Step-grandchild 1 day
Grandparent 1 day
Grandparent-in-law 1 day
Aunt Not covered
Uncle Not covered
Brother 1 week
Sister 1 week
Step-sister 1 week
Step-brother 1 week
Brother-in-law * See below
Sister-in-law * See below

 

 

 

e One (1) week is provided for the death of an
employee's brother-in-law or sister-in-law of the first
degree which refers to the employee’s spouse’s
sibling.

e One (1) day is provided for the death of an
employee's brother-in-law, or sister-in-law of the
second degree which refers to the employee's
sibling’s spouse, OR the employee’s spouse’s
sibling's spouse.

Section 5.5 MILITARY LEAVE

5.5.1 Military leave shall be granted to employees in
accordance with the provisions of federal and state law.
City Council reserves its right to supplement the
aforementioned federal and state law military leave
provisions.

5.5.2 Regular employees on approved Military Leave shall be
entitled to their regular salary and compensation as a
City employee for the first 30 calendar days of such
leave in any fiscal year. Benefits are applied in
accordance with Human Resources Policy.

17
Section 5.6

Section 5.7

Section 5.8

5.5.3

The City shall provide continued health and dental
benefits to such employee’s dependents, provided that
the dependents were covered for such benefits prior to
the employee being called to active duty.

LEAVE OF ABSENCE

5.6.1

5.6.2

5.6.3

5.6.4

Every employee of the City may be allowed a leave of
absence without pay by said employee’s department
head or designee, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar
days.

Every employee of the City, except temporary or
seasonal employees, may be allowed a leave of
absence without pay upon recommendation of said
employee’s department head or designee with the
approval of the Human Resources Director not to
exceed ninety days. Leave of absence beyond a ninety
(90) calendar-day period must be approved by the City
Manager. Leave of absence beyond a one (1) year
period must be approved by the City Council.

Except as may be required by state or federal law, an
employee of the City shall not be entitled to receive the
benefits of vacation, holiday, sick leave or any portion
of the City’s contribution towards health, dental, life or
disability insurance premiums while on such leave.
Also, the employee’s performance evaluation/merit
increase date shall be subject to adjustment for all non-
work time of twenty (20) days or more. The employee’s
hire date with the City will not be affected.

Family, Medical and Pregnancy Disability: Family,
medical and pregnancy disability leave shall be granted
to employees in accordance with the provisions of
federal and state law.

RELEASE TIME

The City will grant release time of 20 hours per year for the
Association President or designee.

ADMINISTRATIVE TIME

While on Administrative Time Off (aka Administrative Leave or
Administrative Suspension), an employee shall not be forced to use
vacation and holiday time. However, an employee placed on
Administrative Time Off with a previously approved vacation shall

18
ARTICLE 6

Section 6.1

Section 6.2

Section 6.3

ARTICLE 7

Section 7.1

be permitted to take such vacation (using the employee’s vacation
bank) without restriction unless the Police Chief determines that the
nature of the investigation concerning the employee, if any,
requires the employee to remain reasonably available to respond to
the police department and the Chief rescinds the approved vacation
in his written suspension notice to the employee with specific
reasons stated therefore. In such case, the employee shall be
permitted to take his/her vacation immediately upon return to
regular duties.

VACATION
POLICY

Vacation leave shall be scheduled and approved by the department
head. Subject to department head approval, employees may take
earned vacation within the same calendar year it is earned. No paid
vacation leave shall be allowed unless such leave has been already
earned.

If, on January 1, an employee has more than two years
accumulated and unused vacation, the department head shall be
required to schedule the employee for enough vacation so that the
employee's vacation balance will be reduced to no more than two
years accumulation by March 1.

VACATION SCHEDULE

The City's vacation schedule for the unit shall have the following
vacation accrual schedule:

Years of Service Vacation Hours Earned
0-4 80
5-9 120
10-14 160
15+ 200

ANNUAL VACATION BUY DOWN

Supervisors may annually buy-down up to 120 hours of vacation
time elected in January for payment in November. Such election
must be made during January of each year but may be rescinded
at any time prior to November 1.

HOLIDAYS

JULY 7, 1970 MOU TERMS

Notwithstanding the terms of the July 7, 1970 MOU, the Association

19
Section 7.2

Section 7.3

Section 7.4

Section 7.5

has consciously waived observance of the Cesar Chavez holiday
during the term of this MOU.

HOLIDAYS OBSERVED
Authorized holidays are as follows:

New Year's Day — January 1“

Martin Luther King Day — 3" Monday in January
Lincoln's Birthday — February 12"

President’s Day — 30 Monday in February
Memorial Day — Last Monday in May
Independence Day — July 4"

Labor Day — 1°" Monday in September
Columbus Day — and Monday in October
Veteran’s Day — November 11%

Thanksgiving — 4" Thursday in November

Day after Thanksgiving — 4" Friday in November
Christmas Day — December 25"

ELECTION DAY NOT A HOLIDAY

The provisions of state law making every day on which an election
is held throughout the state a state holiday shall not apply or create
a holiday.

OBSERVANCE OF HOLIDAYS

TAAL Uniformed Services Sergeants: (including: Patrol,
Metro, Motor Sergeant). Each holiday will be observed
on the actual date of said holiday.

74.2 Non-uniformed Services: If an authorized holiday falls
on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be treated as
the holiday. If an authorized holiday falls on a Saturday,
the preceding Friday shall be treated as the holiday.

HOLIDAY TIME CREDIT

Holiday time will be credited based on shift hours. This means, for
example, that an employee assigned a 10 hour shift shall receive
10 hours holiday time credit, and an employee assigned a 12 hour
shift shall receive 12 hours holiday time credit. Similarly, an
employee on a 10 hour work day authorized to be off on a holiday
shall be considered as having worked 10 hours on the holiday.

75.1 When the holiday falls on the employee's normal day

off, the employee may elect to take the holiday off on
another day within that same pay period subject to the

20
ARTICLE 8:

Section 8.1

Section 8.2

7.5.2

same options listed above. Management must approve
an employee’s choice of day off at least two weeks prior
to the holiday.

Each employee shall have the option to defer receipt of
compensation for each holiday occurring during the
calendar year until the end of the year, at which time
the employee shall receive a cash payment equal to
the value of all unused or unpaid holidays. Such
election shall occur prior to January 1 of each year.

EMPLOYEE INSURANCE

MEDICAL / DENTAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.1.1 The City will pay the monthly premiums on behalf of
each employee and eligible dependent under the
medical insurance programs available through the City,
not to exceed the following category limitations:

Dec 2006 Dec 2007 Dec 2008
Employee $471 $471 $480
Employee plus one (1) $705 $775 $850
dependant
Employee plus two (2+) or $935 $1024 $1122
more dependants

8.1.2 The contribution amounts listed in 8.1.1 can be used for
medical and dental premiums.

8.1.3 During the term of this agreement, the City may
discontinue any health insurance plan which does not
maintain City-wide enrollment of at least 150
employees.

8.1.4 The contributions do not apply to the third payroll

period in any one month.

LIFE INSURANCE

8.2.1

8.2.2

The City shall purchase for affected employees a six
thousand dollar ($6,000) term life insurance plan.

The City will provide Sergeants term life insurance in
an amount equal to twice the employee’s annual base
salary calculated as of August 1° of each year. This
insured amount will include accidental death and

21

 
Section 8.3

ARTICLE 9:

Section 9.1

dismemberment.

LONG TERM DISABILITY

8.3.1

8.3.2

The City shall contribute ten dollars ($10.00) per month
per employee toward the group long term disability
program maintained by the Association for its members.

If the Sergeant does not participate in the Long Term
Disability (LTD) program the City will contribute an
additional $15 per month to the City’s deferred
compensation program for that Sergeant.

RETIREMENT

RETIREMENT PLAN

The City shall pick up each affected employee's standard
contribution to the Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS)
not to exceed nine percent (9%) of the affected employee's
compensation reported to PERS. Said PERS pickup shall be
credited to the employee's account with PERS.

9.1.1

9.1.2

9.1.3

9.1.4

The above PERS pick up shall not be considered as
base salary but shall be considered employer
contribution pursuant to Section 414(h)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code.

The city shall provide the One-year Highest
Compensation benefit for all Police Unit employees
(Government Code Section 20042)

For employees who intend to retire after May 15, 1992,
they may elect to have their final year’s salary
augmented by the 9% currently being contributed by
the City to PERS. By so doing, the employee becomes
responsible for paying his/her contribution to PERS.
Notice to the City of intent to retire and to exercise this
option must be given one (1) year in advance and must
represent the employee’s good faith intent to retire;
under no circumstances will this option be available for
more than twenty-six (26) pay periods for any one
employee.

The City shall provide the Public Employees Retirement
System (PERS) three percent (3%) at age fifty (50)
retirement benefit for eligible unit members retiring on
or after the effective date December 17th, 2004.

22
Section 9.2

Section 9.3

Section 9.4

9.1.5 The City will contract with Public Employee’s
Retirement System to provide the % Widow's
continuance option, known to PERS as the ‘1957
Survivor Benefit’ to all safety employees in the Police
and Supervisory units.

9.1.6 The City will contract with PERS for the third level 1959
Survivors’ Benefit.

DEFERRED COMPENSATION

The City shall make available to affected employees its 457
deferred compensation programs.

9.2.1 The City will implement a program permitting unit
members to elect to place overtime pay in their
respective deferred compensation accounts. The
amounts remain subject to limits established by plan
administrators or the Internal Revenue Service.

HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR RETIREES

The City will provide a group medical health insurance policy similar
to the health insurance carriers currently provided to active
employees at the retiree’s own expense without any City
contribution toward the premium for said policy.

HEALTH INSURANCE FUND FOR RETIREES (1991 Plan)

9.4.1 The City has established the RPOA/City of Riverside
Fund (hereafter "Fund") for retirees in the amount of
$750,000. That amount to be prudently invested so that
it draws or bears interest.

9.4.2 Beginning July 1, 1991 the principal of the Fund will be
used to help pay premiums for group health insurance
for police retirees from classifications belonging to the
non-management unit covered by this agreement, or
retirees from the Police Management Unit who were
employed under the agreement during a period of
salary contribution to the fund, regardless of retirement
date, subject to the following conditions:

9.4.2.1. The Fund shall contribute Seventy-Five dollars
($75.00) per month for employees who retired
prior to June 1, 1990.

9.4.2.2 The Fund shall contribute One Hundred Fifty

23
dollars ($150.00) per month for employees who
retire on or after June 1, 1990.

9.4.2.3 Notwithstanding the above amounts, in no event

shall the contribution exceed the dollar amount
being contributed to current employees at the
employee only rate.

9.4.2.4 In order to be eligible, regardless of date of

9.4.2.5

9.4.2.6

retirement, an employee must meet the following
eligibility requirements:

9.4.2.4... An employee who receives a service
retirement or a non-industrial disability
retirement must have twenty (20) years’
service in law enforcement as a sworn
employee; of those 20 years a minimum
of fifteen (15) years must be served as a
sworn employee with the City of Riverside
Police Department and the employee
must have retired from the City.

9.4.2.4.2 Subject to the following provisions, an
employee who receives an_ industrial
disability retirement will be eligible after
years of active service plus years on
disability retirement equal 20, provided
that the industrial disability retiree has
served a minimum of five (5) years with
the City of Riverside Police Department in
a sworn capacity. Years of active service
may include up to five (5) years sworn law
enforcement service with another agency.
The RPOA/City Advisory Group may
make exceptions to the total years of
service requirement for industrial disability
retirements in case of catastrophic injury
or other compelling circumstances. In the
event the Advisory Group is deadlocked
on any such question the matter shall be
referred to expedited binding arbitration.

The spouse of a retiree for whom the City is
making contributions may elect, upon the death of
the retiree, to continue in the same plan for up to
five (5) years at his/her own expense.

A retiree whose personal annual income, including
retirement payments but excluding deferred

24
9.4.2.7

9.4.2.8

9.4.2.9

compensation withdrawals, exceeds the then
current maximum base salary for the position held
at time of retirement will not be eligible for City
contributions during the ensuing year.

A retiree who is eligible for coverage under a
different plan by virtue of his/her own employment
or spousal employment is not eligible for such
contributions during the period of such coverage.

It is contemplated that retirees who are temporarily
disqualified under paragraphs 9.4.2.6 and/or
9.4.2.7 above may, at some time, no longer be
ineligible under the criteria of those paragraphs. In
such event, if during the period of ineligibility they
did not maintain coverage in a City sponsored
health insurance program at their own expense,
they may apply for readmission to a City
sponsored health insurance program for retirees. If
the insurer will not let them back in and they
qualify for and obtain an individual program of
medical insurance, the Fund will make the
appropriate contributions to them for so long as
they remain insured and eligible. Neither the
Association nor the City is a guarantor of
readmission or admission to a City sponsored
group health plan Aor to any other health
insurance plan.

The City will not be requested to augment this
particular Fund except as follows:

9.4.2.9.1 When the amount in the Fund equals or is
less than the equivalent of a one percent
(1 %) salary increase for the bargaining
unit, the Association may request that the
remainder of the Fund be applied one-half
to the salary schedule and the other half
revert to the City, or in connection with the
next negotiations, propose that a new
Fund be established or that the amount in
the Fund be increased.

9.4.2.9.2 If the trigger point has been reached
(Fund equals 1 % salary increase) and
there is a significant chance the Fund may
exhaust itself before expiration of the then
current Memorandum of Understanding
the Association may request a reopener

25
limited to the issues of retiree health
insurance fund and salaries.

9.4.2.9.3 Any current employee who retires relying

9.4.2.10

9.4.2.11

9.4.2.12

in whole or in part upon the availability of
this benefit is not entitled to a continuation
of the benefit beyond the funded amount.
The continuation of this benefit is subject
to the negotiating process and may be
terminated through negotiations or by
exhaustion of the Fund amount. In such
event, the retiree will have no further right
or entitlement to a continuation of this
benefit. The rights of employees who
have retired as of the date of this
agreement are subject to the same
limitations and conditions.

Entering into this agreement neither the
Association nor the City is guaranteeing that City
sponsored coverage will be available for persons
who have retired prior to the effective date of this
agreement. If City sponsored coverage is not
available for any such retiree, he/she will be
entitled to apply the contribution to payment of
premiums for another health insurance plan in
which he/she is enrolled. This section 9 titled
“Health Insurance Fund For Retirees (1991 Plan)"
is subject to the savings and separability language
of this Memorandum of Understanding and it is
understood and agreed that the voiding of one or
more components of this program will not
automatically void the remaining components of
the program.

A joint Association/City advisory committee will
review claims for contributions and decide
disputed claims; and shall be provided with
periodic reports as to the status of the Fund. The
committee will consist of two members appointed
by the Association and two members appointed by
City management.

The establishment of this Fund is based on the
principle that it is "governmental" and, therefore,
exempt from ERISA. Any effort or enactment to
bring this Fund under ERISA will cause the
immediate dissolution of the Fund with one-half
the remaining principal to be distributed in equal

26
9.4.3

9.4.2.13

9.4.2.14

9.4.2.15

lump sums to the participating members and one-
half to revert to the City.

The City's obligation is limited to contributions; it is
not a guarantee of coverage. The City reserves
the right to provide alternate plans and carriers,
including a plan geared specifically for retirees.

As soon as practicable following the date of
agreement, the City and Association shall arrange
for the transfer of the then current Fund to the
Association pursuant to the Protocol for Transfer
and letter from counsel for the Association dated
May 10, 1999 both of which are attached to this
Agreement as Appendix C.

The City and the RPOA will develop a process
(such as the Insurance Advisory Committee) to
review and thereafter complete a review of retiree
health savings account options. Once completed,
the parties may jointly agree to present proposals
to City Council for consideration.

Enrollment Provisions for Post 1991 Hires

9.4.3.1

9.4.3.2

9.4.3.3

Unit members who were hired after July 1, 1991
and who have not already contributed to the
RPOA / City of Riverside Fund (hereafter “Fund”)
either by direct contribution or by deferring the
agreed upon percentage of pay shall have a one-
time opportunity to participate in the Fund as
follows:

Between September 1 and September 30, 1998
such unit members may elect to participate in the
Fund by authorizing a payroll deduction equal to
five percent (5%) of the current gross salary
(exlusive of P.O.S.T.) of a top step patrol officer
for a period of one (1) year, which sum will be
deposited with the Fund. As an alternative, such
unit members may elect to make a one-time
payment of the total amount into the Fund. A unit
member hired after July 1, 1991 who has not yet
completed his or her probationary period shall be
subject to the conditions of section 9.4.3.4 below.

Unit members electing not to contribute shall be
deemed to have waived participation in the Fund.

27
Section 9.5

9.4.3.4 Unit members hired after ratification of this
agreement shall be provided the same election
opportunity as described in paragraph 9.4.3.2
above during the thirty (30) day window period
following satisfactory completion of _ their
probationary periods.

9.4.3.5 The Memorandum of Understanding language
which provides that eligible employees include
retirees from the Police Management Unit “...who
were employed under the agreement during a
period of salary contribution to the fund, ...” shall
apply to unit members electing to contribute and
participate under the terms of this section and
shall be interpreted to apply to eligible retirees
from both the Police Management Unit and the
Police Supervisory Unit.

9.4.4 Fund Transfer (1991 Plan)

As soon as practicable the City and Association shall
arrange for the transfer of the Retirement Fund (1991
Plan) to the Association pursuant to the Protocol for
Transfer and letter from counsel for the Association
dated may 10, 1999 both of which are attached as
exhibit C. Even though said letter identifies a particular
investment brokerage firm to act as investment advisor
to the Trust; the parties agree that the Association may
utilize any other comparable registered investment
advisor firm.

RETIREE HEALTH INSURANCE FUND (2006 Plan)

In addition to the Health Insurance Fund for Retirees (1991 Plan)
addressed in Section 9.4, the Association shall create and manage
a Trust Fund to help offset medical costs for retirees.

9.5.1 Effective July 1, 2006, the City shall contribute each
month toward a retiree medical trust fund to be
established by the Association an amount equal to fifty
dollars ($50) for every active employee in this unit of
representation who is in a paid status. Until the trust
fund has been established, the funds will be deposited
by the Association into an interest-bearing account. As
soon as the trust has been established, the funds in
that account will be transferred by the Association to
the trust.

9.5.2 Effective January 1, 2008, the City will contribute one

28
ARTICLE 10:

Section 10.1

Section 10.2

Section 10.3

hundred dollars ($100) monthly for every active
employee in this unit of representation into said fund.

9.5.3 The trust shall provide post-retirement medical benefits
only to individuals who have retired under any of the
following conditions:

1. A service retirement with fifteen (15) or
more years of sworn service with Riverside
Police Department.

2. An industrial disability retirement with the
City of Riverside

9.5.4 The Association agrees to allow the City to audit the
books and records of the trust at the City’s request.

ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING OR SCHOOLS
ADO WITH 28 DAYS NOTICE

Any member who attends mandatory or required training or school
(as defined below) on his or her regularly scheduled time off shall
receive an Adjusted Day Off (“ADO”) for each day spent in training
or school if the City provides written notice twenty-eight (28) days
or more in advance of the first date on which the member is
scheduled to attend training or school.

For purposes of this Agreement “mandatory or required” training or
schools shall include any training or schools where members of
RPOA are required or ordered to attend by police management.

ADO SCHEDULING

Adjusted days off shall be mutually agreeable to the member and
the Department, or, if no agreement is reached, adjusted days off
shall be in conjunction with the member's regularly scheduled days
off.

OVERTIME FOR UNUSED ADO’S

ADO's not taken within the same twenty-eight (28) day work period
in which the employee attended mandatory school or training shall
result in the City treating the equivalent of such time not taken but
spent in mandatory school or training as time actually worked for
purposes of computing entitlement, if any, to overtime
compensation under the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”).

29
Section 10.4

Section 10.5

Section 10.6

Section 10.7

Section 10.8

ARTICLE 11:

Section 11.1

28 DAY WORK PERIODS IDENTIFIED

Current year FLSA twenty-eight (28) day work periods shall be
identified by the Police Department by making some notation on
the paycheck stubs of each RPOA member, or provide such
information to the police accounting section who will generate a
calendar and disseminate it to all sections, which shows the work
period for each RPOA member and which indicates the length of
that period and its starting time.

FAILURE TO PROVIDE 28 DAY NOTICE

Any member who is required to attend training or school on his or
her regularly scheduled day off shall receive overtime
compensation (pay or compensatory overtime hours, at the
member's discretion, not to exceed the negotiated cap) at the rate
of time and one-half of his/her “regular rate of pay” for each day
spent attending such training or school if the City fails to provide
the member with written notice of the training or school at least
twenty-eight (28) days in advance of the first day on which the
member is scheduled to attend training or school.

28 DAY NOTICE WAIVER

A member may voluntarily waive his/her right to twenty-eight (28)
day advance notice, in which case he/she shall receive Adjusted
Days Off as if the City provided at least twenty-eight (28) days
notice as explained in Section 10.1 above.

MEET AND CONFER WAIVER

The City and the Association waive their rights to compel the other
to meet and confer regarding scheduling and/or compensation with
respect to attendance at training or school as explained in this
Section during the current labor contract negotiations or in
connection with a successor Memorandum of Understanding.
ADHERENCE TO PROVISIONS

The above provisions regarding training or school shall be strictly
adhered to by police management in all divisions within the
Department.

TRANSFERS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT

MEET AND CONFER REGARDING TRANSFER POLICY

The City and RPOA agree to meet and confer regarding the
department transfer policy. The Riverside Police Department

30
ARTICLE 12:

Section 12.2

Policy and Procedure Number 5.20 Transfer Policy shall be
incorporated into this Memorandum of Understanding.

PROMOTION AND RECLASSIFICATION
SERGEANT PROMOTIONAL PROCESS

Promotion to the rank of sergeant shall require a written test,
outside oral board interview, and completion of a data fact sheet.
Officers and Detectives who are off probation with Riverside Police
and possess a basic P.O.S.T. certificate with five (5) years
experience in law enforcement in a public agency and 20 semester
units of police related college course work are eligible to compete.

Candidates shall be scored on the written test, and upon passing
that, shall be interviewed by an outside oral board. The Human
Resources Department shall compile the scores. Successful
candidates will complete a Data Fact Sheet and submit to the
Personnel Services Commander. The testing components shall be
weighted as follows:

 

Written Test 50%
Oral Interview 50%
100%

12.2.5 Standardized Written Test

12.2.5.1 Developed and scored by outside contractor with
Riverside Police Department (RPD) approval.

12.2.5.1 Administered — through Human Resources
Department.

12.2.6 Outside Oral Interview Board

12.2.6.1 Three Police Lieutenants or higher rank from
Southern California agencies which are similar in
size to Riverside shall be secured by the Human
Resources Department with assistance from the
Police Department.

12.2.6.2 City Human Resources Department representative
may monitor (non-voting).

12.2.6.3 The Police Department shall develop interview
board questions and provide them to Human
Resources.

12.2.6.4 Oral Board rating sheets developed by Human

31
12.2.6.5

12.2.6.6

Resources staff and approved by the Police
Department, will be used to ensure an equitable
and consistent rating process. Instructions on the
appropriate use of the rating forms will be
disseminated to all raters prior to the interview
board. On the day of the board, Human
Resources will instruct raters on the use of the
forms.

Final candidates score is the average of the total
board scores. The average score shall be
compiled by Human Resources.

A certified list of candidates shall be compiled by
Human Resources.

12.2.7 Data Fact Sheet

12.2.7.1

12.2.7.2

12.2.7.4

Officers and Detectives passing the written and
the oral test shall complete a Data Fact Sheet.

Candidates will be responsible for completing the
Data Fact Sheet and returning it to the Personnel
Services Commander.

Copies of diplomas and certificates may be
attached to the Data Fact Sheet.

12.2.8 Certification

12.2.8.1

12.2.8.3

12.2.8.4

12.2.8.5

At the conclusion of the testing process Human
Resources will develop a list of the passing
candidates and rank them.

The Chief of Police may promote from the list of
candidates certified by Human Resources or the
Chief may with concurrence of the Director of
Human Resources, reject or terminate the certified
list with good cause.

The Chief of Police shall provide, in writing, the
reasons for requesting the rejection and/or
termination of the certified list to the Director of
Human Resources who shall either accept or deny
the request. The Human Resources Department
shall notify candidates of the reason(s) for
terminating the list.

The list of eligible candidates shall be valid for any

32
Section 12.3

ARTICLE 13:

ARTICLE 14:

ARTICLE 15:

openings in the Sergeant ranks for one year from
the date the list was established, unless earlier
rejected or terminated. The list may be terminated
anytime prior to expiration date.

RECLASSIFICATION POLICY

The City reclassification policy will provide for Unit members that
employees who are reclassified will receive a salary increase to the
next higher step upon reclassification.

PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS

Lieutenants shall review draft performance evaluations with Unit
members prior to their finalization and being passed on to
Captains.

DRUG TESTING

Both parties remain committed to a drug-free workplace. The
parties further agree to work together to evaluate and revise RPD’s

1997 Drug Testing Policy.

REPLACEMENT OF PERSONAL ITEMS

15.1 The City will reimburse Unit members for lost and/or
damaged personal items subject to the following
conditions:

15.2 Such items are required for the job, but not provided by
the City.

15.3 The items are lost and/or damaged while the employee

is on duty, in the course and scope of duty; the loss is
not caused by the negligence of the employee.

15.4 Total reimbursement per employee pursuant to this
policy shall not exceed $100 per fiscal year. Subject to
the same dollar limitation, reimbursement for civilian
clothes shall be at the level equal to the comparable
uniform component.

15.5 Reimbursement shall not be required where the
employee's insurance covers the item.

15.6 Notwithstanding any of the above, this policy shall not

apply to second or back-up weapons or personal
vehicles not required by the Department to be utilized.

33
ARTICLE 16:

Section 16.1

Section 16.2

Section 16.3

15.7 Utilization of this policy for any one incident constitutes
a waiver of the right to pursue reimbursement for that
item or incident from the City in other administrative or
legal forums; otherwise the existence of this policy
does not constitute a waiver of either party's defenses
or remedies in connection with additional incidents
during the same fiscal year.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
PURPOSE

To provide employees with an orderly procedure for processing a
grievance. The current M.O.U. for the bargaining unit should be
referenced as to specific language.

DEFINITION

A grievance is an allegation by an employee that the employee has
been adversely affected by a violation, misinterpretation, or
misapplication of the specific written provisions of a Memorandum
of Understanding, the City's salary and fringe benefit resolutions,
or the City's written personnel policies and procedures.

POLICY

Regular employees shall use the hereinafter prescribed procedure
for grievances arising out of the administration of ordinances or
regulations dealing with personnel, salary, or other benefits, any
alleged improper treatment of an employee, or any alleged
violation of commonly accepted safety practices and procedures.

16.3.1 Representation - An employee may be represented at
all stages of the grievance procedure by himself/
herself or, at his/her option, by a representative.

In this grievance procedure, any reference to grievant
means grievant, his/her representative, and/or a
bargaining unit.

16.3.2 Time Limits - The time limits herein are maximum
time limits; however, time limits may be extended by
mutual agreement.

16.3.2.1 In the event the grievant fails to meet a time
limit, such failure shall constitute a waiver of
the grievance.

16.3.2.2 In the event the City fails to meet a time limit,
such failure shall allow the grievant to proceed

34
16.3.3

to the next level of the grievance procedure.

Arbitration Costs and Selection - The cost of the
hearing officer/arbitrator shall be borne equally by the
City and the Association. If the parties are unable to
agree upon a hearing officer or arbitrator, hearing
officers and arbitrators shall be selected from a panel
submitted by the California State Conciliation Service;
each party shall alternately strike names until there is
one remaining. If the Association is neither the
grievant or the grievant's representative, the cost of
the hearing officer/arbitrator shall be borne equally by
the City and the grievant.

Section 16.4 PROCEDURE

Responsibility

Department, Grievant

Grievant

Department Head

Action

1. Informal Step: As a general policy,
attempts shall be made to ascertain

all facts and adjust all grievances on
an informal basis between the
grievant and a supervisor in the
chain of command up to and
including the Division Head.

Presentation of this grievance shall
be made within ten (10) working
days from the date the grievant
knew or should have known of the
act or occurrence giving rise to the
grievance.

2. Step One: If the grievance is not
adjusted to the satisfaction of the
grievant within five (5) working days
after presentation of the grievance,
the grievant may submit the
grievance in writing to the
department head within the next ten
(10) working days.

3. Meets with the grievant within five
(5) working days of receipt of the
written grievance and communicates
a decision to the grievant within five
(5) working days after the meeting.

35
Grievant

Hearing Officer

36

Step Two: If the grievant is not
satisfied with the decision of the
department head, the grievant may,
within ten (10) working days after
receipt of the department head's
decision, submit in writing the
grievance and request for a hearing
to the Assistant City Manager for
review.

Hears case and makes recom-
mendation according to the type of
grievance.

a. Non-disciplinary grievances:
Heard by a hearing officer
who shall make advisory
recommendations to the City
Manager. The City Manager's
decision shall be final.

b. Disciplinary grievances _ for
regular employees who are
suspended for ten (10) days
or more, are demoted in rank,
or are terminated. Appeals to
a hearing officer whose
decision is final. Either party
may seek review of the
hearing officer's = decision
pursuant to Code of Civil
Procedure Section 1094.5.

c. Other disciplinary grievances
for employees who receive
discipline other than that
which is indicated in b. The
matter may be appealed to
binding grievance arbitration.
The arbitrator's decision and
award shall be final and
binding on the parties and
may be reviewed only pur-
suant to Code of Civil
Procedure Section 1285 et
seq.
ARTICLE 17:

AGENCY SHOP

17.1

17.2

17.3

17.4

17.5

17.6

17.7

The Agency Shop provisions shall be applied for the
term of this agreement as follows:

Subject to Article Ill Section 4, pavroll deductions, of
the City's Employer-Employee Relations Resolution,
upon the voluntary written authorization of bargaining
unit employees, the City shall deduct and remit to the
Association, the Association's initiation fee and periodic
dues for members of the Association.

Any unit member who is not a member of the
Association or who does not make application for
membership within thirty (30) days following the
effective date of this paragraph, or, for those hired after
the effective date of this paragraph, within thirty (30)
days from the date of commencement of duties, shall
become a member of the Association or pay to the
Association a fee in an amount equal to the
Association's periodic dues; provided, however, that
the unit member may authorize payroll deduction for
such fee in the said manner as provided in paragraph
17.2

Dues withheld by the City shall be transmitted to the
Association Officer designated in writing by the
Association as the person authorized to receive such
funds, at the address specified.

The parties agree that the obligations herein are a
condition of continued employment for unit members.
The parties further agree that the failure of any unit
member to remain a member In good standing of the
Association or to pay the equivalent of Association
dues during the term of this agreement shall constitute,
generally, just and reasonable cause for termination.

The City shall not be obligated to put into effect any
new, changed or discontinued deduction until the pay
period commencing fifteen (15) work days or more after
such submission.

No unit member shall be required to join the
Association or to make an agency fee payment if the
unit member is an actual verified member of a bonafide
religion, body, or sect which has historically held
conscientious objections to joining or financially
supporting employee organizations; this exemption

37
17.8

17.9

17.10

17.11

shall not be granted unless and until such unit member
has verified the specific circumstances. Such employee
must, instead, arrange with the Association to satisfy
his/her obligation by donating the equivalent amount to
one of the non-labor, non-religion charitable funds, tax
exempt under Section 501 (c) (3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, listed below:

17.7.1 _ Riverside Police Officers Memorial Fund
17.7.2 Heart Association

17.7.3. American Cancer Society

Whenever a unit member shall be delinquent in the
payment of dues or fees, the Association shall give the
unit member written notice thereof and fifteen (15) days
to cure the delinquency; a copy of said notice shall be
forwarded to MERO. In the event the unit member fails
to cure said delinquency, the Association shall request,
in writing, that the City initiate termination proceedings.
The termination proceedings shall be governed by
applicable state laws and are specifically excluded from
the Grievance Procedures Agreement.

The City shall not deduct monies specifically earmarked
for a PAC or other political activities unless such
deduction is affirmatively, separately and specifically
authorized in writing by the unit member.

The Association shall keep an adequate itemized
record of its financial transactions and shall make
available annually to the City and, upon request to the
employees who are members of the Association, within
sixty (60) days after the end of its fiscal year, a detailed
written financial report thereof In the form of a balance
sheet and an operating statement, certified as to
accuracy by its President and Treasurer or
corresponding principal officer, or by a Certified Public
Accountant. A copy of financial reports required under
the Labor-Management Disclosures Act of 1959 or
Government Code Section 3546.5 shall satisfy this
requirement.

This organizational security arrangement shall be null
and void during the period following expiration of this
Memorandum of Understanding and prior to entering
into a successor agreement containing the same
provision for organizational security. Additionally, this

38
ARTICLE 18:

ARTICLE 19:

17.12

organizational security arrangement shall be null and
void if rescinded by a vote of employees pursuant to
Government Code Section 3502.5(b).

The Association will defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Riverside from any loss, liability or
cause of action arising out of the operation of this
article.

NO CONCERTED ACTIVITIES

18.1

18.2

18.3

During the term of this agreement, the Association, its
officers, agents, representatives and/or members agree
they will not cause, condone or participate in any strike,
walkout, work stoppage, job action, slow down, sick-
out, refusal or failure to faithfully perform assigned
duties and responsibilities, withholding of services or
other concerted interference with City operations,
including compliance with the request of other labor
organizations to engage in any or all of the preceding
activities.

In the event of such activities, upon request by the City,
the Association shall immediately instruct any persons
engaging in such conduct that they are violating this
agreement and that they are engaging in unlawful
conduct and that they should immediately cease
engaging in such conduct and resume full and faithful
performance of their job duties.

In addition to any other lawful remedies or disciplinary
action available to the City, the City may, in addition to
the above, invoke any and all remedies available to it
under its Employer-Employee Relations Resolution.

PROVISIONS BY LAW

19.1

It is understood that existing ordinances, resolution and
written policies of the City cover matters pertaining to
employer-employee relations including, but not limited
to, salaries, wages, benefits, hours and other terms and
conditions of employment. Therefore, it is agreed that
all ordinances, resolutions and policies, including the
Employer-Employee Relations Resolution are hereby
incorporated herein by this reference and made part
hereof as though fully set forth and except as provided
herein shall remain in full force and effect during the
term hereof. The parties hereto agree that nothing in

39
19.2

19.3

19.4

this MOU shall in any manner abridge, restrict or modify
the rights and prerogatives of the City and _ its
employees set forth in Article | , Sections 4 and 5, and
Article || Section 1 B of Resolution No. 15079, or its
successor, if any.

The City and the Association agree that for the term of
this Agreement, each party waives its rights and each
party agrees that the other party shall not be obligated
to meet and confer with respect to any subject or matter
pertaining to or covered by this Agreement except as
expressly provided for in this Agreement and as to
meeting and conferring over the renewal or continuation
of this MOU at its expiration date in accordance with
said Employer-Employee Relations Resolutions.

It is understood and agreed that this MOU is subject to
all present and future applicable federal and state laws
and regulations and the provisions hereof shall be
effective and implemented only to the extent permitted
by such laws and regulations, or otherwise held invalid
or unenforceable by any tribunal of competent
jurisdiction, such part of provisions shall be suspended
and superseded by such applicable laws and
regulations and the remainder of the MOU shall not be
affected thereby and shall remain in full force and
effect.

Upon ratification by the membership of the Association
and by the City Council this MOU shall be effective
through June 30, 2009 and for the durations of any
agreed upon extension.

40
MANAGEMENT REPRESENTATIVES

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 2006-2009
CITY OF RIVERSIDE, RIVERSIDE POLICE OFFICER’S ASSOCIATION
FOR THE POLICE OFFICER / DETECTIVE UNIT

CITY OF RIVERSIDE

¢ j
( A ft 43
\ i a
SH, ss Sa :
Brad Hud: \

f
fi

‘,

a

RIVERSIDE POLICE OFFICERS’
ASSOCIATION

Ken Tutwiler
President

    
   

By é
Brian Smith
Vice-President

By

 

City Manager |
I
By
Tom DeSantis
AssistantCity Manager
Nu
By fan APE
Rhonda Strout
Ns Director
?
i “ f.
By | } Lita (ee
Russ Leach
Chief of Police
By
Dated:

Christian Dinco
Secretary

ve

By Cee 8
Carlos Flores
Negotiations / Police Unit

By

Dated (5 06

44

:
:

 

 

 
APPENDIX A

42
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Police Sergeant (Effective September 8, 2006)
Step 1 2 3 4
Hourly 39.72000 41.70600 43.80000 45.97200
Bi-Weekly 3,177.60 3,336.48 3,504.00 3,677.76
Monthly 6,884.80 7,229.04 7,592.00 7,968.48
Annual 82,617.60 86,748.48 91,104.00 95,621.76
Police Sergeant (Effective July 1, 2007)
Step 1 2 3 4
Hourly 41.30769 43.37307 45.55384 47.80961
Bi-Weekly 3,304.61 3,469.84 3,644.30 3,824.76
Monthly 7,160.00 7,518.00 7,896.00 8,287.00
‘Annual 85,920.00 90,216.00 94,752.00 99,444.00
Police Sergeant (Effective July 1, 2008)
Step 1 2 3 4
Hourly 42.54807 44.67692 46.92115 49.24615
Bi-Weekly 3,403.84 3,574.15 3,753.69 3,939.69
Monthly 7,375.00 7,744.00 8,133.00 8,536.00
Annual 88,500.00 92,928.00 97,596.00 102,432.00

 

 

43

 

 
APPENDIX B

44
Approved:

City of Riverside, California ee eS ne oe 8
Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual Haman Resources Director

City Manager

 

Number:_V-6_ Effective Date:_07/02
SUBJECT: EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM

PURPOSE:

To encourage employees of the City to take educational courses and training programs which
shall enhance and broaden the performance of their present duties and prepare them for
advancement opportunities.

POLICY:

Efforts shall be made to provide training and educational assistance for all levels in the City, from
those requiring a minimum of specialized skills to those requiring higher education preparation.
Completion of a training or educational course shall not guarantee promotion or advancement of
an employee, but is intended to expand skills and knowledge, thus providing the individual with
higher levels of opportunity and performance.

The funds for the Education Reimbursement Program shall be part of the City-wide training funds
budgeted by the Human Resources Department/Training Division. Reimbursement may only be
received for courses which are job related or lead toward possible advancement in the City.

The Human Resources Director shall be responsible for administering the Education
Reimbursement Program and shall have the authority to approve or deny a request for education
assistance. Potential benefit of the course to the City, the recommendation of the department,
the employee's work performance, length of service, previous educational background, and the
amount and types of courses previously taken by the employee may be considered. Approval
shall be limited to courses offered by accredited colleges, universities, community colleges, adult
education, or vocational programs. Accredited courses offered “on-line” through distance learning
are included. Normally, correspondence courses shall not be approved for reimbursement under

this program.

Requests shall be reviewed and approved on an ongoing basis. The employee must receive the
recommendation of the department head and approval by the Human Resources Director prior
to starting a course. In the event of insufficient budgeted funds, approvals shall be tentative,
placed on a waiting list, and subject to final approval upon the availability of budgeted funds. The
waiting list shall terminate at the end of each fiscal year. Only courses that receive final approval
shall be reimbursed. In no event will a course be reimbursed if there are insufficient funds.

When an employee is required by the department to attend a particular course or seminar,
normally the expense shall be the responsibility of the respective department and employee.

45
Number: V-6__ Effective Date:_07/02
As a general rule, time spent on approved educational courses should be outside of scheduled
working hours and shall not be considered as time worked for the City.
Reimbursement under this program will be up to $333 per quarter, or $500 per semester, but will
not exceed $1,000 per fiscal year. It includes the cost of registration, tuition, books and {ab fees.
Special fees, food/meals, parking and mileage/transportation are not eligible for reimbursement.

To receive reimbursement, students must attain a “C” grade or better. Pass\fail or no credit
courses are considered to be “C” grade or better.

Employees are responsible for any income tax liability that may incur under this program.

ELIGIBILI Hl Ss

All regular full-time employees who have completed one year of full-time employment and at least
one probationary period are eligible to apply for education reimbursement.

PR' DU:

Respon: ity Action

Employee 1. Complete an Education Reimbursement
Request (Form 1210.004) secured from the
Human Resources Department.

2. Make request for approval prior to the
beginning of each class, school semester or
quarter.

3. Submit Education Reimbursement Request to
the employee's department.

Department Head 4. Make appropriate recommendations and
forward to the Human Resources Director.

Human Resources Director 5. Review and approve/disapprove request.

Employee 6. Submit Education Reimbursement Request for

Payment (Form 1210.005) with registration
confirmation and verification of grades to the
Human Resources Director within 45 days of
course completion.

46
Number: V-6 __ Effective Date:__07/02

 

Human Resources Department 7. Prepare Request for Payment and submit to
Finance.

Finance Department 8. Make reimbursement to the employee.

Attachments:

1. Education Reimbursement Request (1210.004)
2. Education Reimbursement Request for Payment (1210.005)

47

 
CITY OF RIVERSIDE

EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM APPLICATION

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Name:, Phone: Date of Request:
(Print)

DepartmentDivision: Classification:
PART I: EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT RI NE: Cc lete and s it re enro’
School:
Address.

Course

Dates Number Cost of

From -To of Units Tuition

 

 

 

 

Estimated cost for registration, books and lab fees.

 

How will this course enhance and broaden the performance of your regular duties or prepare you for advancement
opportunities?

 

 

| understand that this training is voluntary, is not considered hours of work and/or employment, and no compensation is
eamed.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Signature of Employee Date
For Office Use:
Recommendation: O Yes ONo

Department Head Date
Comments:
Recommendation: O Yes ONo

Human Resources Director/Designee Date
Comments:,
Estimated Reimbursement:

Form 1210.004

48
CITY OF RIVERSIDE

EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FOR PAYMENT

(Complete and submit within 45 days after course work is completed)

Name: Department/Division:
(Print)

Employee Number:. Classification:

Request Payment to: (Name and complete address)

 

REQUEST FOR EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM REFUND

| have successfully completed the course work, attained the required grade and request reimbursement of tuition and fees in
accordance with the Education Assistance Program. Registration confirmation, certificates of grades and receipts for tuition

are attached.

 

DETAIL OF EXPENSES

| raee | raion | some | trom |

 

 

 

 

 

‘Signature of Employee Date of Request
For Office Use:
Costs for Reimbursement: $. Reimbursement Amount: §$.
Comments:,

 

 

 

ACCOUNT SUMMARY DISTRIBUTION

City Manager (if required)

 

Form 1210.005
Policy No, V-2

49
APPENDIX C

50
SILVER, HappEN & SILVER
A PROFESSIONAL LAW CORPORATION

     

1428 SECOND STREET
‘STEPHEN H, SILVER ;
WILLIAM J HADOEN SANTA MONICA, CALIFORNIA 90401 city MANARERS
‘SUSAN SILVER MAILING ADDRESS STEVEN E. KA\
ROBERT M. WEXLER =
KEN YUWILEA POST OFFICE BOX 2161 pron
ELIZABETH SILVER TOURGEMAN SANTA MONICA, CALIFORNIA 90407-2161 oc
HOWARD A.LISERMAN TELEPHONE (310) 393-1486 ‘SHALE F. KREPACK
asec TELEPHONE (323) 870-0900
FAX (310) 995-5801
May 10, 1999
SENT_V: ‘'o 0 782-547

ORIGINAL MAILED VIA FIRST CLASS MAIL ON MAY 10, 1999

Larry Paulsen, Assistant City Manager
City of Riverside - City Hall

3900 Main Street, 7th Floor
Riverside, CA 92522

   
 
 

Re: Rive

 

Dear Larry:

Per our recent meetings, conversations and correspondence,
this letter will serve to advise you of the contemplated procedures
and safeguards the Riverside Police Officers’ Association (RPOA)
intends to take if the City agrees to transfer control of, and the
entire balance of, the Riverside Police Officers’ Association/City
of Riverside Fund (Fund) established on July 7, 1991, to the RPOA.

RPOA will assume total control of and responsibility for the
Fund as well as sole liability for the money which will be held
separately from other RPOA assets. RPOA:will ensure that the
original purpose and intent of the Fund continues by establishing
a trust and an appropriate administrative and fiduciary oversight
structure and policy.

As envisioned, upon completion of the transfer of the Fund,
RPOA will oversee the governance and administration of the Trust by
a board of overseers made up of members of the RPOA Board of
Directors and/or other active and retired RPOA members.
Administrative functions and duties will be assumed by that board
of overseers and by the paid staff of RPOA. To. fulfizi- ite
fiduciary responsibilities in overseeing the assets of the Trust,
RPOA will develop and incorporate an Investment Policy Statement in
the Trust Document. In addition, RPOA will name the Investment
Brokerage firm of A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc. as Investment Advisor
to the Trust.

51
SILVER, HADDEN & SILVER

Larry Paulsen, Assistant City Manager
May 10, 1999
Page - 2 -

As you are aware, the Fund as established was specifically
maintained as a government plan which was not subject-to the
strictures and requirements of the Employees’ Retirement ‘Income
Security Act of 1974 (29 USC § 301, et seq., ERISA). RPOA will
obtain expert legal advice as to its need to be subject to ERISA
once it assumes control of the Fund. It may choose to do so, even
if not so required. In addition, RPOA stands ready to release,
indemnify and defend the City in all appropriate and legal ways
from future responsibility for the transferred Fund and for its
subsequent operation by RPOA.

Please let me know if you require further specifics. We can
get you this information immediately. Also, we may want to discuss
whether probationers who wish to contribute to the Fund once they
become permanent employees will be able to do so through payroll
deductions.

Sincerely,

,
edt CL
"SUSAN SILVER

 

SS:clm
cc: Jeff Joseph, President
Ron Wright

Riverside Police Officers’ Association
David Miller, Esq. (Via Facsimile 310-373-6808)
(00863.ter

52
David , Miller
Gregory |. Danis,
Emi R Uyehara
Bridget A. Flanagan
Nancy 8. Bourne
Katheym Lube
Marilyn J. Cleveland
Laurie S.fuenger.
Joan Birds

 

Claudia Madrigal
Peter W. Sturges
Lute €. Reynolds
Sue Ana Salmon Evans
Janet L. Mueller

Ivette Pea

Stephen D. Leanos
Elizabeth A. Estes
Enid ¥. Rivera
Gregory J. Rolen

M. Todd fenks

Usa Sowo Herninder
Daniel A. Ojeda
Enrique Mt. Vassallo
Philip I. Henderson

 

OF Counset
Priscilla Brown
Sandra Woliver

 

Sreciat Counse.
Martha Buell Seott
Mark W. Kelley

Douglas N. Freifeld

 

Margaret €. O'Donnell
1939-1998

 

MILLER BROWN & DANNIS

ATTORNEYS AT LAW

A PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION

June 21, 2000

REPLY TO PALOS VERDES

VIA FACSIMILE/ORIGINAL TO BE MAILED

Susan Silver, Esq.

Silver, Hadden & Silver

P.O. Box 2161

Santa Monica, CA 90407-2161

Re: City of Riverside/
RPOA Negotiations;
Our file 2275.2.201

Dear Susan:

Enclosed are copies of the following documents:

i Proposed Tentative Agreement; and

2 Side letter concerning comprehensive MOU.

By mail I will also forward Exhibit A to the Agreement which consists of the
agreed upon Protocol for Fund Transfer and a copy of your-letter dated May 10, 1999.
Pursuant to your request I shall also forward a signed copy of the Special Agents’

MOU from earlier this year.

After you have reviewed the tentative agreement kindly contact me if you have

any questions, comments or concerns.

DGM:sp
Encls.

Very truly yours,

Ny, BROWN & DANNIS

David G. Miller

53

71 Stevenson Street
Nineteenth Floor

San Francisco, CA 94105
Tet $157 54334111

Far 415/ 543-4384

2550 Via Tejon
Suite 34

Palos Verdes, CA 90274
Tel: 310/373-6857,

Fax: 310/373-6808

Santa Cruz/Santa Clara
Monerey/San Benito. CA
Te: 831.663.0870

Los Angeles, CA
Tek: 310/642-1123

Costa Mesa, CA
Tel: 714/ 662-6977

San Diego, CA
Tek: 619/595-0202

ween mbdlawe.com
Susan Silver, Esq.
Silver, Hadden & Silver
June 21, 2000

Page 2

ce: Larry Paulsen
Judith Griffith
Siobhan Foster
Sgt. Jay Theuer

54
PROTOCOL FOR TRANSFER OF FUND

The City of Riverside (City) and the Riverside Police Officers Association (RPOA or
Association) recognize the following elements as essential components for transferting the
RPOA/City of Riverside Fund (Fund) assets and administration to a new trust fund to be
established and administered by and through RPOA. In accepting these elements, the parties
rely, in part, upon the representations from counsel for the RPOA as stated in her letter dated
May 10, 1999:

1. Fund Assets and administrative responsibility for the Fund shall be transferred to.
the Association, subject to the following conditions.

2. The current Memorandum of Understanding will be amended as necessary to
reflect this transfer.

3. RPOA will agree to defend , indemnify and hold the City harmless in connection
with both the transfer and the administration of the Fund on or after the effective date of
transfer.

4. The Transfer agreement will recite that the Fund’s Principal shall be for the sole
and exclusive use and distribution to eligible retirees for purposes of defraying the cost of
premiums for approved medical insurance programs. :

5. The definition of eligible retirees shall not change from that contained in the
current Memorandum of Understanding for a period of at least three (3) years after the
transfer; no such change in definition may occur without the City’s approval, which approval
will not unreasonably be withheld. :

6. The RPOA will assume any and all tax consequences which may arise from the
transfer and defend, indemnify and hold the City harmless for the tax consequences, if any,
of such transfer. :

7. If, at any time, the RPOA decides to terminate operation of the Fund, the excess
amount remaining in the Fund will revert to the benefit of the bargaining unit and the City as

currently outlined in Section 16, paragraph 9(a) of the parties’ current Memorandum of

55
Understanding.

8. RPOA will secure a legal opinion upon which the City will rely informing the
parties as to whether or not there must be City representation on the Board administering the
Trust and, if so, in what proportion.

9. RPOA will secure a legal opinion upon which the City will rely informing the
parties about the extent of liability or responsibility attaching prior to the date of transfer in
the event the Fund becomes an ERISA Fund as a result of the transfer.

10. The parties waive any contention that this transfer triggers the dissolution
provisions contained in Section 16, paragraph 13 of the parties’ current Memorandum of
Understanding.

Adopted for purposes oi proceeding with the transfer this 2" day of July, 1999.

CITY OF RIVERSIDE RIVERSIDE POLICE OFFICERS’
ASSOCIATION

56
APPENDIX D

57
BEN H. LEWIS

DANIEL E. STONE
CITY MANAGER

Cry Counc,
MAYOR

WAYNE H. HOLCOMB = WARD NO.
JOHN M. SOTELO WARD NO.
ARTHUR J. PICK, JR. WARD NO.
A. NORTON YOUNGLOVE WARO NO.

H. H, BELDING, Ill, M.0. WARD NO.
SAM A. DIGATI WARD No.
BRUCE 8. BETZ WARD NO.

 

July 7, 1970

As a result of the meeting and consultation sessions between the
management team and the Riverside (Police Officers Association
representatives of the police unit, agreement is reached on the
following items:

1.

SISTER CITIES

The City will grant a general across-the-board salary increase
in the amount of 8.5% effective as of the first pay period in
July, 1970.

The City will adopt a new policy to provide that accumulated
unused sick leave at. the time of retirement, or disability
retirement, or death of an employee shall be paid to the
individual or his beneficiary in accordance with the fol-
lowing formula:

a. More than 5 years' but less than 10 years' of contin-
uous service will be paid 25% of unused accumulated
sick leave. .

b. More than 10 years' of continuous service will be paid
50% of unused accumulated sick leave.

The City will adopt a new policy providing for an education-
incentive wage program based upon the Police Officer State
Training system of issuing Certificates of Achievement.
Police personnel holding an Intermediate Certificate will
receive a 5% increase and those police personnel holding an
Advanced Certificate will receive a 10% increase. Both the
5% and 10% increase will be based upon the officer's
existing salary.

The City will grant a flat $55.00 per month hazard pay for
motorcycle duty.

The City will assume full payment of the employee's monthly
health insurance premium of the less expensive of the 2 plans
now offered, regardless of which plan (Kaiser or Aetna) the
employee chooses. This does not include any payment toward
dependent coverage.

 

CUAUTLA, MEXICO AND @ SENDAI. JAPAN

58
6.

 

The current City holiday policy will be changed to permit
police employees to have a holiday on any day so proclaimed
by the President of the United States or Governor of the
State of California by including the following statement in
the City's holiday policy: "Any day that is declared a
legal holiday by the President or thé Governor". This

holiday, if so declared, will be treated as any other holiday
by police public safety personnel.

RIVERSIDE POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION TEAM:

 

59
