San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

BACKGROUND

 

To provide the most effective and efficient service to the public, the San Jose Police Department
must utilize to the fullest, the talents and abilities of all Officers. To this end, it has formed an
“Advisory committee", known as the "Personnel Assignment Committee" (PAC). The PAC will
assist in developing an “Officer Transfer Policy" which shall be beneficial to the Department and
to the individual Officer. The PAC will not have the power to alter “Department Policy".

PROCEDURE

The PAC is an advisory body which shall review the “Officer Transfer Policy". It reviews
proposals for changes in “policies and practices" submitted by the Assistant Chief of Police.
The Committee shall also consider suggestions and requests for extensions of assignments
made by members of the Department and shall also present its comments and
recommendations to the Assistant Chief of Police.

The PAC, as created by this document, shall assist the Department in fully utilizing its human
resources. It also ensures that all Police Officers have the opportunity to serve in a number of
“Organizational Units" and in a variety of basic “Beat Patrol" and "Specialized Assignments".

The PAC shall consist of five (5) “sworn" members of the Police Department. One member
shall be selected by the Chief of Police and another by the Police Officers’ Association. The
remaining three (3) members will be selected with the concurrence of the first two (2) members.
The Commander of Personnel shall attend as a non-voting advisory member of the Committee.

The SJPD PAC shall regularly review the list of Assignments in “Specialized Units" and will
recommend additions, deletions and/or modifications. The PAC shall review suggestions
submitted to it and may make recommendations to the Assistant Chief of Police. The Assistant
Chief of Police will forward to the PAC details of proposals to create or delete “Specialized
Assignments" and to make changes in entry requirements or performance standards of
assignments in “Specialized Units". The PAC will also submit its comments and
recommendations in this area to the Assistant Chief of Police. All members of the Police
Department are encouraged to submit proposals for changes to the PAC.

The published entry criteria, and performance standards for each category of "Specialized
Assignment" shall be established by Unit Commanders. Proposals for changes in these or other
conditions of the Assignment shall be submitted to the Assistant Chief of Police through the
“chain of command." The Assistant Chief of Police will forward these to the PAC for review and
recommendations. The City is not bound to accept any recommendations or suggestions made
by the PAC. Except for those rights enumerated herein, this policy is not intended to create a
general waiver of rights. Changes in excess of the provisions of this Policy remain subject to
any applicable statutory or charter obligation to meet and confer unless waived in the MOA or
other agreement between the parties.

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 1 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

ORDER

 

OTP-1001: SELECTION OF OFFICERS FOR "SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENTS"

It is recognized that experience in a number of “Organizational Units" and “Specialized
Assignments" is necessary for an Officer's “career development." It is intended that Police
Officers have the opportunity to apply and be selected for such “Specialized Assignments".
Should conflict arise between the immediate or long term needs of the Department as
determined by the City, and the career development needs of any officer, the City retains all
tights, powers and authority granted to it or which it has, pursuant to law, or other provisions by
the City Charter including but not limited to: the right to direct the work force; increase,
decrease or reassign the work force; hire, promote, demote, discharge or discipline for cause;
reclassify employees; provide merit increases; assign employees overtime and special work
requirements; and determine the necessary merits, mission and organization of any service or
activity of the City or any City Department, Agency or Unit. Except for those rights enumerated
herein, this policy is not intended to create a general waiver of rights. Changes in excess of the
provisions of this Policy remain subject to any applicable statutory or charter obligation to meet
and confer unless waived in the MOA or other agreement between the parties.

OTP-1002: DEFINITION OF "SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENT"

“Specialized Assignments" are “full-time” assignments not available through the bid process,
and have primary responsibilities outside the basic "Beat Patrol" function, or any "part-time"
position (e.g. Bomb Squad) with additional pay which includes tasks outside the basic “Beat
Patrol" function. Temporary Duty Assignments (TDY) of six (6) months or less, and “full-time”
“Modified Duty Assignments" are excluded from these procedures.

OTP-1002.1: REQUIRED BFO "PATROL ASSIGNMENT"

All Police Officers applying for a “Specialized Assignment" must complete 12 months in a
position fulfilling the duties of the basic “Beat Patrol" function immediately prior to being
assigned to a “Specialized Unit". Officers may apply for a “Specialized Unit" prior to completing
12 months in a “Beat Patrol" function, but shall NOT be transferred prior to the 12 months.
Exception: If Shift Change is moved either backwards or forwards in time within the month that
it is required to occur per Memorandum of Agreement Article 17.1, the 12-months in patrol
mandated by this section shall either be rounded up or rounded down in accordance with the
specific alteration made to the shift change. This section shall not apply to any Officer who was
on a list of transfer candidates, as defined in OTP 1008.7 as of December 20, 2005.

OTP-1002.2: REQUEST FOR WAIVER OF OTP-1002.1

Upon reaching 50 years of age and having completed 25 years of active service or 55 years of
age and having completed 20 years of active service, any “sworn” member of the Department
serving in the classification of Police Officer (2215) may submit a written request to the
Assistant Chief of Police for consideration or "waiver of required patrol duty time” as outlined in
OTP-1002.1. An Administrative decision shall be final and not subject to further administrative

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 2 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

review. If the Assistant Chief of Police approves this one time waiver, the Officer is still subject
to the maximum assignment duration of the specialized unit by which s/he is selected. This shall
not extend the established assignment time “lids” as identified in the Transfer policy, nor serve
as a waiver of any entry or testing requirements.

 

OTP-1002.3: UNITS AND TASK FORCES EXCLUDED FROM OTP-1002.1

Police Officers exiting the F.T.O. Program are excluded from the requirement outlined in
Section OTP-1002.1.

Police Officers applying for the F.T.O. Program, and the RATTF, BNE, SCCSET, D.E.A., FBI
Violent Gang Task Force, ISU, J.T.T.F., or other Task Forces with similar specific missions
formed during the life of the contract are excluded from the requirement outlined in section
OTP-1002.1 (Required BFO “patrol assignment"). However, immediately upon completion of
one of the task force assignments, the officer shall be required to fulfill section 1002.1, 12
months in patrol obligation.

OTP-1002.4: DEFINITION OF REQUIRED "SERVICE TIME"

The time periods listed in Appendix II, described as required employment as a San Jose Police
Officer, prior to being eligible for application to a “Specialized Assignment’, must be
“uninterrupted service" to be fulfilled immediately prior to the “final filing date" for application.
This required employment time specifies the "hire date" as a San Jose Police Officer (2215).

Service time for Lateral Hires applying for FTO positions only will be defined as three (3) years
“beat patrol" with their previous agency and two (2) years as a San Jose Police Officer (2215).

OTP-1002.5: RETURN TO SAME UNIT & "SUNSET CLAUSE"

All "sworn" personnel covered by this Policy shall be excluded from returning to a previously
assigned “Specialized Unit" for a period of three (3) years from “date of exit" from that
“Specialized Assignment".

OTP-1002.6: "TDY" ASSIGNMENTS

In order to effectively manage and control all temporary assignments, all "TDY" Assignments
shall be reviewed every six (6) months, by the Assistant Chief of Police or the Deputy Chief of
the Bureau of Administration.

The PAC Committee will review all TDY assignments in sufficient time to comply with inter-
bureau time lines as identified by the BFO Administrative Unit, prior to shift change. No TDY
assignment will exceed one (1) year without review and approval by the Assistant Chief. No
TDY assignment will exceed two (2) years unless:

1. The assignment is defined as requiring special skills, knowledge, characteristics and/or
experience in a criminal investigation capacity for a particular criminal investigation the

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 3 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

Police Department needs performed; or
2. Necessary to accommodate existing agreements and arbitration decisions covering
release time for POA Officers.

 

Any TDY time in a unit will count toward the maximum duration time if the member applies for
and is accepted in the Unit. This will protect the Officers’ transfer eligibility within the guidelines
of the “Officer Transfer Policy”.

A TDY assignment of more than six (6) months will not count toward the twelve (12) month
requirement in OPT § 1002.1.

OTP-1003: MAINTENANCE & AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION

“Specialized Assignment" files shall be created by the “Personnel Unit" using information
provided by the Unit Commanders. Files shall be reviewed regularly by Unit Commanders and
changed as necessary following the procedures set out under the “Officer Transfer Policy”.
These files may be viewed by any member of the Department. The files shall contain
Assignment descriptions, information on published entry requirements, performance standards
and duration of Assignments.

OTP-1004: PUBLISHED "ENTRY CRITERIA"

Officers applying for “Specialized Assignments" shall demonstrate that they meet the published
“Entry Criteria". “Entry Criteria" may specify formal and/or informal training, experience, prior
documented performance, physical condition or any other job related objectives determined to
be pertinent to the Assignment.

OTP-1005: NOTIFICATION OF VACANCY

The Unit Commander of a "Specialized Unit" having a vacancy, shall not later than two (2) "pay
periods" (i.e. four (4) weeks [or 28 days]) prior to the "final filing date", send to the Police
Department “Personnel Unit" a memorandum announcing the vacancy. The memorandum will
describe the Assignment, and give the Assignment duration, the published entry requirements,
final filing date, interview dates, any selective certification and special skill needs of the Unit,
and any other relevant information. On an effective date, a Unit Commander will announce and
establish an “Open Eligibility List" with all “special need" requests coming before the PAC
Committee for a recommendation to the Assistant Chief of Police.

OTP-1005.1: PUBLISHING OF VACANCY

The “Personnel Unit" shall publish the vacancy to all Bureaus and Units at least two (2) "pay
periods" (i.e. four ([4 weeks [or 28 days]) prior to the “final filing date". The Bureau of Field
Operations (BFO) Command Officers shall be responsible for announcing vacancies at all
Briefings and for posting “vacancy notices" in an appropriate location in the Briefing Room.

OTP-1 006: APPLICATION FOR "SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENTS"

Officers interested in any “Special Assignment" and who meet the published entry criteria, may
submit applications to the appropriate Unit Commander. Application forms will be available from

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 4 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

the Police "Personnel Unit”.

 

 

OTP-1006.1: "DEADLINE" FOR FILING APPLICATION
There shall be no extension of "final dates" for “Specialized Assignment" applications, unless for
whatever reason, no Applicants apply by that date.

OTP-1006.2: SPECIAL NEEDS

In the event a Unit Commander determines that a special skill, ethnicity, or gender is required
for a specific position, and individuals with the specific qualification(s) are exhausted on the
“one-year eligibility list" (OTP-1007.7), a transfer opening announcement will indicate that only
Officers with the specific qualification(s) are requested to apply. Such officers must be in
compliance with OTP 1002.1 (required BFO patrol assignments) OTP 1002.4 (required service
time) and OTP 1002.5 (return to same unit and “sunset clause”) at the time of application. The
announcement must specify the exact number of selection(s) to be made from the resulting list
of candidates where upon, after specific selections are made, the list shall immediately expire.

OTP-1007: REVIEW OF APPLICANTS

The Unit Commander will review all applications to ensure that Applicants meet the published
“entry criteria". If in the judgment of the Unit Commander, an Applicant fails to meet the “entry
criteria", the Commander shall notify the Applicant as soon as possible. advising the Officer that
s/he will not be considered for the Unit and shall explain the reason. Applicants who are
qualified for the position may, at the discretion of the Unit Commander, be interviewed prior to
commencement of testing process. Applicants selected for interview shall be notified no less
than three (3) days prior to the interview date.

OTP-1008: EXAMINATION PROCEDURE

Examinations may consist of three (3) separate procedures. Unit Commanders have discretion
to use any one of or a combination of the three (3) listed examination procedures; considering
that all examination processes may not be necessary for every Assignment. All three parts of
the examination process shall be rated to equal 100%, with the exact percentages of any
component parts to be determined and announced in advance of the examination process by
the department. The total of all exam scores shall not equal more than 100%. If no Applicant is
deemed suitable for the Assignment, Management may assign an Officer to the vacant position.
In such case, the selection method will be subject to the approval of the Assistant Chief of
Police.

OTP-1008.1: SENIORITY POINTS

“Seniority Points” will be calculated at one-half (1/2) point per year of service with the San Jose
Police Department (carried out to two (2) decimal places). All experience as a San Jose Police
Officer (2215) shall be utilized to arrive at a total of “seniority points" (excluding breaks in
service) from the “hiring date” to “final filing date" for the desired Assignment.

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 5 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

OTP-1 008.2: WRITTEN EXAM

 

The Unit Commander may require all Applicants to submit to a “written exam", the content of
which must be relevant to the position. If no “written exam" is required, Unit Commanders shall
avoid the addition of “percentage points” for this portion of the qualifying examination.

OTP-1008.

 

PRACTICAL EXAM

The Unit Commander may require all Applicants to submit to a “practical exam", the content of
which shall be relevant to the position. If no “practical exam" is required, Unit Commanders shall
avoid the addition of “percentage points” for this portion of the qualifying examination.

OTP-1008.4: INTERVIEW EXAM

The Unit Commander may require all Applicants to submit to an “interview exam", the content of
which shall be relevant to the position. If no “interview exam" is required, Unit Commanders
shall avoid the addition of "percentage points" for this portion of the qualifying examination.

OTP-1008.5: INTERVIEW PANEL

Selected Applicants shall be interviewed by an “Interview Panel". The Unit Commander shall
select at least three (3) members for the Panel from within the Unit. The Commander shall be a
member of the Panel, and the other members shall reflect the ranks within the Unit and may
include the Unit Commander's Supervisor.

OTP-1008.6: MAXIMUM TOTAL SCORE

The maximum amount of points earned by anyone Applicant for a specific position being tested
for shall not exceed 100 "percentage points", plus allowable “seniority points" as outlined in
OTP-1008.1.

OTP-1008.7: LIST OF TRANSFER CANDIDATES

A list of Applicants for each position tested for shall be developed so as to reflect the Officer
with the greatest number of points as number one on the List and the Officer with the least
number of points as occupying last place on the List. Notwithstanding any other provision in the
document, the Officer listed "number one" shall be selected for the Assignment, unless the
Department deems that Officer not to be suitable. If no Officer on the list is deemed suitable for
the Assignment, Management may assign an Officer to the vacant position subject to the
approval of the Assistant Chief of Police, provided that such Officers are in compliance Sections
1002.1 and 1002.4. That decision shall be upheld unless it is arbitrary, capricious or
unreasonable. The list of applicants shall remain is existence for a maximum of one (1) year
from the date of publication, unless such list is exhausted or eliminated prior to that date. A new
list will be established prior to the expiration of an existing list, to take effect immediately upon
the expiration date.

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 6 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

OTP-1008.8: RETENTION OF TEST-MATERIAL RESULTS

 

All Applicants’ examination materials shall be retained by Unit Commanders until the expiration
of the list, or as ordered by the Assistant Chief of Police for a longer period of time.

OTP-1009: NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE

The Unit Commander shall notify the selected Applicant and will give the Police Department
“Personnel Unit" Commander the name of the Officer selected to fill the vacancy. The Unit
Commander shall notify those Applicants not selected and shall explain the reason for non-
selection to the non-selected Officer(s) if requested. (Refer to OTP-1 008.7).

OTP-1009.1: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

The standards set out shall be the “minimum performance" levels expected of the Officer. These
standards may include, but are not limited to, ability to work, initiative, organization, enthusiasm,
compatibility with co-workers or any other circumstance or condition which is pertinent to the
performance of the Assignment.

OTP-1009.

 

: EVALUATION

 

The established performance standards shall be used as the basis for evaluation. Officers
assigned to a "Specialized Unit" shall be evaluated at least once during the first six (6) months
of the Assignment. There shall be an “exit evaluation" upon transfer from the “Specialized
Assignment". Unit Commanders shall discuss evaluations with the Officer concerned.

OTP-1009.3: MAXIMUM DURATION OF ASSIGNMENT
Each category of “Specialized Assignment" shall have an established maximum Assignment

duration ("LIDS") as provided in Appendix Il. Assignment durations that expire three (3) or
fewer months from shift change shall be deemed to expire at the time or said shift change.

OTP-1009.4: EXTENDING MAXIMUM DURATION

Extension of maximum Assignment duration shall be allowed at the discretion of the Assistant
Chief of Police after recommendation from the PAC, pursuant to OTP Procedure section.
Requests for “extensions” and the causes necessitating it will be submitted by the appropriate
Unit Commander through the normal "chain of command" to the Assistant Chief of Police for
approval.

OTP-1010: OVERVIEW OF "SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENT"

The attached "Specialized Assignment Overview" sets forth the "LIDS" described herein.
OTP-1011: MAXIMUM ASSIGNMENT DURATION “LIDS”

Those Persons already serving in an Assignment with an agreed upon "LID" shall serve out the

remainder of the time covered by the "LID". Those persons serving in an assignment without a
previously established "LID" shall be bound by the newly established “LIDS”.

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 7 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

OTP-1012: FORMATION OF NEW SPECIALIZED UNITS

 

Any unit created outside the basic beat patrol (Teams 1-96, I.C. & PRPR) shall be reviewed by
the PAC Committee to ensure that it complies with the Transfer policy.

OTP-1012.1: VACATING AND RECONSTITUTING DISBANDED SPECIALIZED UNITS

The following procedures shall be followed in fully or partially disestablishing any
specialized unit of the SJPD:

(a) In the event of a partial disestablishment, the Department shall first solicit
volunteers to leave the unit. Additional required vacancies shall be achieved by vacating
the unit based upon inverse unit seniority based on current assignment. All members
leaving a specialized unit pursuant to this provision shall have the “lid” (i.e., the
maximum duration of assignment) governing his/her duration of assignment in that unit
tolled at the moment the Officer vacates the unit.

(b) An officer who vacates a specialized unit pursuant to this section shall be allowed to
resume a position in the unit in the event of reconstitution/re-establishment, with the
following caveats:

(1) The officer has not worked in another specialized assignment since that Officer
was forced to leave the unit;

(2) The amount of time that has expired since the officer was forced to leave the unit
does not exceed the amount of time equivalent to that unit’s “LID”. For example,
if a unit with a three (3) year “LID” is reconstituted four (4) years after being
disbanded, this provision shall not apply.

(c) In the event that the unit is reconstituted/re-established, that unit's positions shall be
filled according to unit seniority.

(d) Upon re-entry into the formerly disestablished unit, the Officer’s “LID” shall begin to run
again. For example, a unit with a three (3) year “LID” is disbanded two (2) years after
Officer “A” is first assigned to the unit. The unit is reconstituted one (1) year later and
Officer “A” who has not worked in any other specialized assignment, returns to the unit
pursuant to this section. At that time, Officer “A’s” “LID” has one (1) year left.

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 8 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENT SCORING

 

The below listed scores shall be used when determining an Applicant's ability to perform when
tested for a position.

OUTSTANDING (100-90)

Applicant demonstrates extensive knowledge and awareness of unit goals and objectives. Past
performance indicates very strong capability to achieve unit duties and responsibilities and to
work cooperatively with others. Applicant reflects very valuable experience and productivity in
dealing with unit related public contacts.

ABOVE STANDARD (89.99-80

Applicant demonstrates knowledge about many of the Unit's goals and objectives. Past
performance indicates high capability to achieve most unit duties and responsibilities and to
work cooperatively with others. Applicant reflects experience and productivity in dealing with unit
related public contacts.

ACCEPTABLE (79.99-70

Applicant demonstrates some knowledge about some of the goals and objectives. Past
performance indicates some ability to achieve unit duties and responsibilities and work
cooperatively with others. Applicant would be fairly productive when dealing with unit related
public contacts.

UNACCEPTABLE (69.99-60

Applicant fails to demonstrate knowledge of the goals and objectives. Past performance
indicates lack of ability to achieve unit duties and responsibilities and/or work cooperatively with
others. Applicant lacks experience and would be unproductive when dealing with unit related
public contacts.

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 9 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

APPENDIX I: SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENTS APPLICATION

 

 

INSTRUCTIONS: Complete each inquiry below & return to Personnel

 

APPLICANT'S NAME:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(Last) (First) (M.L.)
BADGE #
SJPD APPOINTMENT
DATE:
SJPD SERVICE BREAKS:
SJPD
(Years/Months)

 

POLICE EXPERIENCE:
OTHER AGENCIES
(Years/Months)

 

 

If yes, list Agencies:
List any teaching, training or supervisory experience relative to this position:

 

 

 

 

Do you possess a teaching credential?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(YIN)
PRESENT ASSIGNMENT: Chit (ean) Days Off)
Current dates of present Basic Beat Patrol Assignment:
PRESENT SUPERVISOR:
LAST TWO
SUPERVISORS: (Name) (Dates) (Name) (Dates)
Have you previously applied for other Special Assignments?
If yes,
list: (SiN)
Do you speak a foreign language? (If yes, list languages and estimate fluency)
(YIN)

List training courses and applicable dates (Basic Academy excluded):
Applicant's DOB: Home Phone:
Signature: Date:

DO NOT WRITE BELOW THIS LINE (Personnel Unit use only)
Oral | written Practical = Subtotal Sen. Pts = Total Score
# of On List

Position on List Date List Certified

 

 

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 10 of 13
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

APPENDIX II: SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENT OVERVIEW

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF
. SJPD Entry Maximum Assignment
Units F a"
Requirement Duration
Council Security 3 Chief of Police
Discretion
Vice Admin 3 3
Criminal Intelligence Unit 4 4
Press Information Officer 3 3
Internal Affairs Unit 4 2 w/ 1 yr. ext. with
Assistant Chief Approval
Research and Development 3 3
J.T.T.F 3 3
BFO
. SJPD Entry Maximum Assignment
Units F a"
Requirement Duration
Patrol/Field Operations:
Administrative Officer 3 3
Field Training & Eval. Program 3 3
Patrol Special Operations:
MERGE 3 4wi 1yr. ext. with
Bureau Chief
Recommendation
Bomb Unit 4 4
K-9 3 7 wi 1yr. ext. with
Bureau Chief
Recommendation
GSU 3 3
Metro Unit 3 3
School Safety 3 3
School Liaison Program 3 3
Patrol/Traffic Enforcement:
TEU Motors 3 5
International Airport Division 3 3
Airport Explosives Detection Canine 3 7 w/1 yr. ext. with
Bureau Chief Approval
Pre-Processing Admin. Officer 3 3
Helicopter Unit 5 10

 

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 11 of 13

 
San Jose Police Department

 

Officers’ Transfer Policy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bol
Uni SJPD Entry Maximum Assignment
nits ~ ~
Requirement Duration
Homicide Unit:
Homicide 3 4
Night General 3 3
Crime Scene — Major Crimes 3 5
TIU 3 5
Auto Theft 3 3
Gang Investigations Unit:
Gang Investigations Unit 3 3
FBI Violent Gang Task Force 3 3
Assaults Unit:
Assaults 3 3
Juvenile 3 3
Anti Graffiti Detail 3 3
Sexual Assault Investigations Unit:
SAIU - General 3 3
SAIU — Sex Registrants 290 Team 3 3
SAIU — CED Computer Forensics 3 5
- pe 3 3.w/ 1yr. ext. with
SAIU - CED — Human Trafficking Bureau Chief Approval
Family Violence Unit 3 3
Robbery Unit:
Robbery 3 3
Missing Persons 3 3
Covert Response Unit:
Covert Response Unit 3 4wi 1yr. ext. with
Bureau Chief Approval
ISU 3 4wi 1yr. ext. with
Bureau Chief Approval
DEA Task Force 3 3
SCCSET Task Force 3 3
BNE Task Force 3 3
CRU Canine 3 7 w/ 1 yr. ext. with
Bureau Chief Approval
Financial Crimes Unit:
Burglary 3 3
Fraud 3 3
Court Liaison 3 3
Regional Auto Theft Task Force 3 3

 

 

 

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 12 of 13

 
San Jose Police Department

Officers’ Transfer Policy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BOA
Uni SJPD Entry Maximum Assignment
nits ~ ~
Requirement Duration
License & Permits 3 3
Personnel:
Background Investigation
Recruiting 3 3
Training:
Range 3 4
CPT 3 4
Video Training Officer 3 3
PAL 3 3
City Attorney's Office 3 3
BTS
Uni SJPD Entry Maximum Assignment
nits A >
Requirement Duration
Systems Development Unit 3 4

 

 

 

 

Revised: April 22, 2014
Page 13 of 13
