POLICE UNIT

MEMORANDUM

OF

UNDERSTANDING

EFFECTIVE:

August 16, 2015 — August 11, 2018

 
au

San Mateo Police Officers’ Association

Table of Contents
Article 1- Recognition... .csessesssssecsisssscsecssrsssecssscsscssvesaececssvessesesoseseresstsesticnsesnserueencrrsesesegene 1
Article 2 - Payroll Deduction .....ccescsssesssseseessesseseessesssseeseeseesseseennsseersseesesessussscanssseaseaseseeaneeneres 1
Article 3 - Mail Distribution ........ sestssaeeneneesescscaucsvenesesseeseseassesscsacaesesseecasacasdsesssessesnasssnasearoesesseenesite 2
Article 4 - Salary for POA Unit Classifications.....0.cccccseseessessesseessssecsenesstessecenesnonneesessieesanense 2

4.1 Salary on Initial Appointment
4.2 Salary Advancement Within Range
4.3 Salary on Demotion..
4.4 Salary on Transfer.
4.5 Salary on Military Leave
4.6 Miscellaneous...
4.7 Review Process..

 

 
  
 
 
 

we

5.1
5.2
5.3 Overtime Payment/Compensatory Time
5.4 Overtime Compensation........0...05
5.5 Minimum Overtime at one time - Exception:

5.5.1 Emergency Overtime...

5.5.2 Court Appearance.
5.6 Authorization for Overtime...
5.7 Patrol Officers' Alternative Schedule Plan.

 

 

  
  
 

 

Article 6 -Training Outside Regular Working Hours ........eccsssseessesesseceneecesssseeseeesneceuceeeeenseseeess 7
Article 7 - Sick Leave Payoff ....cscsssssessecssseesssenssscsssssesseessesecanetsnesssscsnsesssessssesgsaneesanieeneenssneeties 7
Article 8 - Termination AlloWame ..sssssssssssssssssssssstisssseisssessssussotsessetsnsetsnsisesisasessseseses 7
Article 9 - Disability Leave for Non-Safety Employees..iccstcscssessesessssseeessesecssssnsesesatenees 7
Article 10 - Military Leave w...cccccssessecseessesssssessessseevessnessccenssueessetseseqacesscssusssecauseescenssnuessness 8
Article 11 - Jury Duty wc cceseeseeecsssessssscsnssssessessecacssensnesustsansesssansssscessveseseeecapersassesansasavsreeseeeesees 8
Article 12 - Retiree Court Appearance .........csesssessseeseeseesseesssscsssensesssessessnseasessseesecsanssareseesseeeanecss 8
Article 13 - Leave Of Absence Without Pay ......csccscssesecsssssnrsssssesssesssmesneessesssseecssnecsseesesneeesnsesss 9

13.1 Family Care Leave... ccc eeceeessceescen ene ece crea ee aa neneteteseneneeseeeeeceeeeeeuaaes 9
Article 14 - Probationary Period wocccssescsesssessseesssecosesessescessssneessesersssessteensssveeneesgeeceermessesses 10

Article 15 - Grievance And Appeal Procedures
15.1 PUrpose... 0c cece eee re eee eee teen bere nee teed nee nneeeeetan een ee eta eee n ap eta eee aa tee ll
 

15.2 Grievance Procedure Definitions

A, Major Grievance...

B. Minor Grievance.

15.3 Exclusions.............

. 15.4 Informal Grievance Procedure
i 15.5 Formal Grievance Procedure.....
15.6 Appeal Procedure To The Personne! Board..
15.7 Time Limits...

 
 
 
 
 
  
  

Article 16 - Disciplinary Procedure .....scsccssssessesessssssssssseneesssssecsessteessesssesnesnesassssseeeaneeseseys 15

: 16.1 Definition of "Disciplinary Action."
i 16.2 Notice of Disciplinary Action.

 
 
 

  
  
  
 
 

 

| 16.3 Appeals....c.cccscceesereererceeee
: 16.4 Removal of Documents from Personnel File.....0.......:e:ccccseseeeseeeesereeeesenenee 18
Article 17 - Layoff Rights... cccscsseessssrsssveesesssvessussesseetsssssarsssesssneessnsesseessnasessescanvensanneeetss 18

17.1 Layoff Defined.

17.2 Seniority.........

' 17.3 Seniority for Layoff Purposes. .
17.4 Bumping Rights.........0..... 19
17.5 Mutually Agreed Upon Transfer. 19
17.6 Severance Package......... eee 20
17.7 Salary in Event of Change Due to Layoff. .20
17.8 Notice of Layoff........... 20
17.9 Effective Date of Layoff.. 21
17.10 Appeal,

Article 18 - Recall and Reinstatement .......cccsscscssssesessseesnecaceeenessesesee senses 2b

18.1 Eligibility
18.2 Order of Recall and Reinstatement.
18,3 NoOtice......ccecccseescaseeeeeneveee
18.4 Credit for Previous Service upon Reinstatement.
18.5 Benefits Calculation upon Reinstatement....
18.6 Qualifications Required for Reinstatement.
18.7 Contact Information for Notice. .
18.8 Meet and Confer...

 

  
  
 
 

Article 19 - Number Of Names To Be Certified on Reemploymentt ..........:..scecsescesessaeeesneeeseeens 22
Article 20 - Reemployment.
Article 21 - Americans With Disabilities Act .....ssscsssssssssssesseecssessensssssssseesssnsserissenseesssnneesses 23
Article 22 - Police Weight Room.
Article 23 - Community Service Officers’ (CSO) Shift Schedule

 

 

 
Article 24 - Community Service Officers’ Break Between Shifts
Article 25 - Duty Differentials

25.1 Bomb Unit
25.2 Standby Pay
25.3 Canine Differential
25.4 Other Duty Differential
25.5 Training Differential.
25.6 Bilingual Differential...
25.7 Community Service Officer - Differential ..
25.8 Shift Differential.

 

 
 
  
   
  
 

Article 26 - Master Officer
Article 27 ~ Holidays... cccsesesecseessessstssesesseasesesresesscscanercanssensussnssesesusassnsesabesonervsnsarsnenseiseseneneese 27

27.1 Scheduled Holidays...
27.2 Weekend Holidays
27.3 Special Holiday Schedule.
27.4 Authorized Holidays,
27.5 Holidays Worked.
27.6 Holiday Payment.

  
 
 
  

Article 28 - Vacation incccsessscessessssecscessseesscanesessssaseeseesssesseesassssesseneessinsoteeensecssseeeneeeses 29

28.1 City Policy
28.2 Vacation Allowance: Non-Safety.
28.3 Vacation for Safety Employees..

 

 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  

28.4 Vacation Accumulation....,

28.5 Continuous Service Defined. :

28.6 Vacation Scheduling...... 30

28.7 Amount of Vacation Time 30
Vacation Emergency

 

28.8 Vacation Pay Advance....
28.9 Proportionate Vacation...
28.10 Vacation Allowance for Terminated Employee

28.11 Vacation Payment... wil
Article 29- Sick Leave wisesesssesscscscsecsssssesssssseseneeassenssssesecssssnsansesesssconsssnesessssseneenensssesneess 31
29.1 Purpose.

 

29.2 Sick Leave Accrual..
29.3 Doctor's Certification...
29.4 Family Sick Leave...
29.5 Extended Sick Leave...
29.6 Bereavement Leave.

 

 
 
 
 
Article 30 - Annual Leave Program ...s..ccccseessesscsseerssnssessanonsssnsenseaseeranessressarssursnssseesnsiies OD

 

A. Implementation
B. Sick Leave Usage Requirements..
1) Non-Safety Employees Accruals.
2) Safety Employees Accruals..
3) Present Accrual Rates.
4) Maximum Accrual.....
5) Sick Leave Balance Upon Conversion.
6) Vacation Balance Upon Conversion
7) Employee Ilness..
8) Family Leave...
9) Vacation Leave.
10) Increments Taken
11) Payoff Upon Separation...
12) Payoff Upon Retirement...
13) Annual Leave Advance...
14) Proportionate Annual Leave.
15) Annual Leave Payment

   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

16) Annual Leave - [ness - Doctor's Certificate 35
17) Family Sick Leave... 35
18) Extended Annual Leave for Hlness.

19) Bereavement Leave

Article 31 - Accumulation of Vacation, Sick Leave, and Holiday Credits. 36
Article 32 - Daily Hour Value ...
Article 33 - Benefits

33.1 Life Insurance.
33.2 AD&D Insurance. .
33.3 Health Insurance
33.4 Pool Money
33.5 Cafeteria Plan
33.6 Dental Insurance
33.7 Vision Insurance... sees
33.8 Long Term Disability (LTD)... ccecceeeeeeccceccceeeece ue nentereneetteeetenseeess 39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  

Article 34 -- Economic Benefits other than Salary... .cccsccsssscesesseceesesneescesssseaeessnsseeeneesnes 39

 

34.1 Mileage Allowance
34.2 Uniform and Equipment Allowance.
A. Initial Uniform Allowance......
B. Police Damage Reimbursement... :
C. Repair or Replacement of Damaged Uniform Items and Personal Property...40
D. Uniform Allowance........ A
E. Police Safety Equipment...
34.3 Police Educational Incentive Program.

 
 
 
 
ml

A. Eligibility,
B. Qualifications..
34.4 Defense of Police Officers. .

 

 
 

Article 35 - Salaries ........cccsssesesssssssssnesssecsssssessesssesavessuecnecssecusecsuesseensessnessesssesereescorseesaseaneensens 4i

35.1 Compensation Increases During the Term of this Agreement.
35.2 Market Placement and Compensation Survey......
35.3 Deferred Compensation - Police Safety Employee
35.4 Retirement Health Savings Account ......
35.5 Base Pay and Premium Pay Calculations.

  
 
 

Article 36 - Retirement ...

 

 

36.1 Legislation
36.2 Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Code.
36.3 Retirement Benefit Plans...
36.4 Retirement Contribution ...

 
 

Article 37 — Classification and Compensation Studies......cccccscssscssesssecsesssesseesseeseseseacesrsenvessess 44
37.1 Timing

 

 
 

37.2 Appeals to Classification and Compensation Studies 4

37.3 Individual Classification and Compensation Study.. 44
Article 38 - Separability of Provisions......c.ccccsssssessesssssusessesesnessssecssessussasseceseusssveccsicnseneenness 44
Article 39 ~ City Rights... ..eesseesccsssesssessnssssssesseesseseresssecsecssecsscsueasneesesseesessesesenneessssssseaseensess 44
Article 40 - No StriKe......cciseesucsessseesseseesnesessesssessrassescansenssneesensecssessueqaiescsesiesanetanssvesaneesese 45
Article 41 - Contracting Out .eecccccssssssscssssssessssesssssumsensessessensessesssssvssestecsussnussessansenssesseennsssnsess 45
Article 42 - Reopener /Continued Discussion .......c..cessessecsnscsessessesecessaseseseseceesosceseseseertereeesees 46
Article 43 - Termination of Agreement .....ccccesessssssesseseesecssseeseeareeenesesessesuastensensceeeneneeneenes 46
Benefit Summary Sheet oo... scessecsesssssvessuscesssnaseseeescssnesavessecsuecseseececteceveseeesnneneeenessneesaees 48
 

 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN
CITY OF SAN MATEO
AND
SAN MATEO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION

This Memorandum of Understanding constitutes the result of meeting and conferring in good
faith pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10, Division 4, Title 1, of the Government Code of the
State of California.

"Employees" means all workers covered by this Agreement whether male or female, and the use
of masculine pronouns or other masculine terms shall include the feminine.

Modifications to existing wages, hours and conditions of employment set forth below have been
agreed to by the signatories to this Memorandum for implementation for all employees
represented by the San Mateo Police Officers’ Association hereafter called "Association." This
Memorandum of Understanding shall remain in full force and effect upon the approval of the
City Council of the City of San Mateo and ratification by members of the Police Officers’
Association. The Agreement of the parties is outlined in the Memorandum of Understanding
which follows:

Article 1
Recognition

The City has recognized the Association as the exclusive bargaining representative for all
permanent and probationary employees within the classifications of Police Officer, Community
Service Officer J/II, Dispatcher I/f1, and Senior Dispatcher. For purposes of identification this
unit shall be entitled the Police Unit.

The Personnel Officer, (Municipal Employee Relations Officer), or any person or organization
authorized by the City, is the representative in employer-employee relations.

Article 2
Payroll Deduction

The City shall deduct biweekly from the pay of each authorizing employee Association
membership dues and other mutually agreed upon deductions. The City shall remit such
deductions promptly to the Association.
ms

Article 3
Mail Distribution

The Association may distribute a reasonable amount of information to City employees through
intra- and inter-departmental mail without interference or censorship.

Article 4
Salary for POA Unit Classifications

Compensation is intended to be consistent with City-wide compensation objectives as approved
by the City Council in July of 1993 and commensurate with actual job performance. Effective
with all increases provided after September 1993, job performance will be the sole criteria for
determining an individual employee's placement within a salary range.

41

42

43

Salary on Initial Appointment

On initial merit appointment, the entrance salary shall be at the minimum salary for the
class except, when in the opinion of the City Manager circumstances warrant,
appointment may be made at a higher level on the recommendation of the Department
Head.

Salary Advancement Within Range

Salary advancement within a five-step range shall be based on merit and performance as
determined by the Department Head. The evaluations and recommendations of the
employee's superiors will be used by the Department Head, who will determine the
employee's advancement within the range.

Salary advancement within an established range is typically considered at one-year
intervals. The date of salary review and increase may be advanced or delayed as
determined by the Department Head. Salary advancement within the range typically
occurs in increments of four and one-half percent (4 1/2%). At no time shall an
employee advance beyond the top of the established range. Withholding salary increases
under Article 4 shall not be considered discipline and is not subject to the principles of
Article 14 (Discipline).

Salary on Demotion
"Demotion" shall mean the demotion from one class to a different City class for which
the maximum rate is lower than the maximum rate of the former class. Said demotion

shall be considered voluntary unless it results from the layoff or discipline process.

The salary rate for demoted employees shall be as follows:
 

 

 

 

Reason Rate

A. discipline A. as set by discipline
B. voluntary demotion, or layoff B. top of range
Cc. failure to complete probation after C. return to same telative
promotion pay as held before promotion

44 Salary on Transfer
"Transfer" shall mean a change of positions within the same class or comparable class
with a salary differential of five percent (5%) or less between tops of ranges.

4.5 Salary on Military Leave
All employees who have been granted a military leave will upon their return to the City
service be entitled to the normal salary advancements within the range scale of the
established wage schedule of their classifications that occurred during the period they
were in the military service.

4.6 Miscellaneous
If appointed to a class having a maximum salary equal to that of the immediate former
class, an employee shall be entitled to receive the same rate they would have received if
they had remained in the former class.

4.7 Review Process
Employees may discuss delay of step advance with their supervisor's superior, up to and
including the Department Head, by requesting such a discussion within ten (10) calendar
days of receipt of the document/notification of delay of step. However, no appeal shall
occur from the decision of the Department Head, whether by discipline procedures,
grievance, or otherwise.

Article 5

Overtime

5.1 Definitions
A. Regular overtime is authorized time worked, except emergency overtime, by an

employee in excess of their normally scheduled tour of duty.

B. Emergency overtime is authorized time worked by an employee when he or she is
contacied outside of his or her regular working hours and is requested to report to
duty because of an emergency. Emergency, within the meaning of this Section,
means an unpredictable or unavoidable occurrence at unscheduled intervals
requiring the specific employee reporting to duty to respond to the scene of the
mit

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.5.1

emetgency or other location directly related to the emergency, as directed by a
supervisor. Employees requested to report to duty as part of a minimum or
increased staffing is not considered as an emergency within the meaning of this
section.

Trades

Trades of schedule are for the benefit of the employee. All such trades must be repaid
within the current annual shift selection period or the particular trade will be disregarded
by the City and cannot be made up.

Overtime Payment/Compensatory Time

An employee who accrues compensatory time for overtime worked under the provisions
of Section 5.1 above may waive direct payment of overtime and in lieu thereof may
accumulate time off at the one and one-half (1-1/2) rate to a maximum of one hundred
and thirty-two (132) hours.

A. Exceptions to Accrual of Compensatory Time Off
Upon an Officer’s request and with the approval of the Police Chief or designee,
overtime hours worked for the purposes of training and posted mandatory
overtime for staffing purposes may be compensated in the form of compensatory
time off subject to the accrual limitations above.

B. Use of Compensatory Time Off
The employee may utilize accrued compensatory time just as he/she would any
other paid time off, but the department may not unreasonably prohibit the
employee from utilizing the accumulated time.

Overtime worked shall be paid for at one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's
established rate of pay, including educational incentive pay.

Overtime shall be of at least one tenth (1/10) of ari hour at any one time in order to be
compensable, with the following exceptions:

Emergency Overtime

Any employee who is called in for emergency overtime of any duration shall be
compensated for a minimum of four (4) hours overtime, unless the emergency
notification is less than three hours prior to the employee’s normally scheduled work
time, in which case the employee will be paid as outlined in 5.4 of this MOU. In
compensation for travel time, emergency overtime shall start at the time the employee is
notified, but not exceed one hour.
5.5.2 Court Appearance.

A. The definition of Court Appearance shall include any time a court appearance is
made, sworn testimony is provided, ic. by telephone (with outlined exception per
Subdivision D), DMV Admin Per Se Hearing, whether under subpoena, assigned by
the department, by request of a District Attorney’s Office, a City Attorney’s Office,
or under civil subpoena issued by a Civil Attorney. Overtime spent conferring with
the prosecuting attorney in person will be considered as court overtime and part of the
court appearance.

B. Employees who are assigned to an alternative work schedule (other than a standard
five (5) day - eight-(8) hour work shift) will be paid the minimum four (4) hours pay
if the court appearance occurs on their days off. The four (4) hour minimum is paid
at time and one-half. Employees do not earn the minimum four (4) hours for multiple
appearances in court within the same day. Appearances beyond the initial four (4)
hour appearance period will be compensated for actual hours spent in the court
process at the overtime rate provided in this article.

: C. Employees who are assigned to an alternative work schedule (other than a standard
i five (5) day — eight (8) hour work shift) will be paid a minimum two (2) hours pay if
! the court appearance occurs on their workday, but not during their regular hours (e.g.,
: Court is at 0900 and the employee normally starts his/her shift at 1500 hours). The
I two (2) hour minimum is paid at time and one-half. Employees do not earn the
; minimum two (2) hours for multiple appearances in court within the same day.
i Appearances beyond the initial two (2) hour appearance period but not during their
regular work hours will be compensated for actual hours spent in the court process at
the overtime rate provided in this article.

 

If an employee appears in court on a work day, he/she may work the remainder of
i his/her regularly scheduled shift, or, provided there is sufficient staff available, leave
| (using leave balances).

Employees who are participating in a jury trial or lengthy Preliminary hearings may,
at the department’s discretion, have their shifts rescheduled. Such schedule change, if
any, shall not cause the employee to use leave balances or lose scheduled days off
during the F.L.S.A. work cycle.

 

D. Employees who respond to a subpoena by telephone will be paid a minimum one (1)
hour pay at the time and one-half rate established in this article. Time spent
providing testimony by telephone beyond one (1) hour within the same day will be
compensated for actual hours spent in the court process at the overtime rate provided

i in this article.

i
t
t
i

E. Lunch breaks taken during court overtime are not compensable. However, when
court meal times exceed one (1) bour, the employee shall be entitled to compensation
at the rate prescribed in Section 5.5 for the time by which the meal break exceeds one
mu

5.6

5.7

(1) hour.

F. Employees who obtain a "standby relationship" with court officials will not be
entitled to court overtime pay for hours spent away from the court awaiting call or
recall to the court. They shall be paid a minimum one hour of overtime pay for any
day they are assigned to “standby”. Any time spent on standby beyond one hour in a
single day wilt qualify for standby pay as described in this MOU. Employees must
report within 90 minutes of being called to physically appear in court. If the
employee is called to court during the standby period, the employee will be paid at
the established standby rate for actual time spent on stand-by. In addition, the
employee will be paid Court Overtime for the appearance as established in this
article,

G. For off-duty, out of town Court Appearances, travel constitutes court overtime and is
determined by the round trip from the San Mateo Police Department when said
employee leaves for a courthouse or other location listed on a subpoena.

In order to be compensable, a specific authorization must be obtained from the Police
Chief, or their authorized representative.

Patrol Officers' Alternative Scheduling Plan
A. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this Section only:

1) "Work Cycle" shall mean a twenty-eight (28) day period, ‘beginning on a
day determined by the City. This work cycle definition is intended to be
consistent with definitions of a "work" period under FLSA.

2) "Work Day" shall mean continuous period of on-the-job time in
accordance with the Department’s schedule.

B. Scheduling, Officers assigned to duty in Patrol will be scheduled for work days
of eleven (11) hours in length, and an equal amount of work days to worl days off
during a calendar year. The City will credit individual Officer accounts at the
first of the year and debit at the end of each work cycle as follows:

1) Any work hours worked in excess of one hundred sixty (160) working
hours and less than one hundred seventy-one (171) working hours during a
work cycle shall be paid for at time and one-half in accordance with the
FLSA.

2) Compensation for any work performed beyond the work day of eleven
(11) hours will be paid overtime at the rate of time and one-half at the
MOU OT rate.

3) Court appearance overtime will be compensated for as provided in Article
|

 

5.5, except that pursuant to Article 5.3, the employee will determine the
method of payment.

Cc. The Police Chief may terminate this program at any time after meeting with the
Officers' Association and providing written notice of schedule change to the
Officers' Association.

Article 6
Training Outside Regular Working Hours

Lunch breaks taken during overtime training are not compensable for the first hour. Lunch
breaks taken during training which exceed one hour at the direction of the instructor will be
compensable,

Article 7
Sick Leave Payoff

Upon service or disability retirement, employees enrolled in the vacation/sick leave program
shall be paid a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of their accumulated unused sick leave up to a
maximum of four hundred eighty (480) hours payment. Employees enrolled in the annual leave
program shall be paid a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of their accumulated unused sick leave
up to a maximum of six hundred (600) hours.

Employees separating from the City shall not be allowed to remain on the payroll after their last
day at work. Severance payment shall be provided in a lump sum for all leave accrual eligible
for payout,

Article 8
Termination Allowance

All employees with one (1) year of continuous merit system service, whose employment is
terminated because of death, shall be granted one (1) working day termination allowance at their
basic pay rate, in addition to other compensation due them and one (1) additional day for each
complete year worked thereafter,

Article 9
Disability Leave for Non-Safety Employees

The purpose of this Section is to continue the compensation of employees who must remain off
their jobs as a result of disability occasioned or injury received as a result of the discharge of
wr

their duties as employees of the City.
A Department Head is responsible for determining that only bona fide disability leave is taken.

For each disability, employees other than personnel covered under Section 4850 of the Labor
Code shall be allowed disability leave up to and including sixty (60) working days. Such
disability leave shall be at full pay, less Workers' Compensation. If the sixty (60) working days
become exhausted, additional time off may be charged to sick leave with the following
exceptions: An employee shall not be charged sick leave for that portion of his or her salary for
which temporary disability payments are received under the State Workers' Compensation Law.

Additional compensation may be awarded by Resolution of the City Council to employees
disabled or injured in line of duty, if such compensation is considered merited and is
recommended by the City Manager.

Article 10
Military Leave

Military leave shall be granted by the City in accordance with the provisions of State and Federal
laws.

Article 11
Jury Duty

Employees required to report for jury duty shall be granted a leave of absence with pay from
their assigned duties until released by the Court, provided the employee notifies his or her
Department Head immediately of the notice to serve.

Employees called for jury service shall not be required to assume new or unusual regular
working hours solely as a result of jury service. Every reasonable effort shall be made to ensure
that personnel assigned to work a graveyard or swing shift who are called for jury duty shall be
provided with: 1) a reasonable time for rest and recuperation prior to reporting for regularly
scheduled duty, or 2) excused from their next scheduled shift, upon request by the employee, and
provided that the employee has spent a significant portion of the day at jury duty. For the
purposes of this Section, employees who have served five or more hours on jury duty will be
allowed a minimum of eight hours recuperation break prior to reporting back to work.

Article 12
Retiree Court Appearance

Should retired employees be subpoenaed to appear in court for a case related to their former
duties with the City of San Mateo, they will receive straight time hourly payment for a minimum
of two (2) hours at the step in the range that they were at when they retired. In addition, they

8
|
|
|

 

 

will be reimbursed for mileage to and from their home or the San Mateo Police station,
whichever is the lessor. The mileage will be paid at the IRS mileage rate.

Article 13
Leave Of Absence Without Pay

Leaves of absence without pay may be granted for a period not to exceed one (1) year in cases of
illness not covered by sick leave; in cases of personal emergencies, including childbirth, for
education and training; or when such absences would not be contrary to the best interests of the
City. Any authorization for leave of absence without pay shall be made in writing by the
Department Head.

The employee may elect to use earned sick leave (provided eligible for sick leave) and vacation
prior to commencement of the leave or retain the earned sick leave and vacation for use upon
return to employment.

Absence from duty without pay for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days for
satisfactory reasons may be granted by the Department Head.

Any employee who does not return to his employment on or before the date of expiration of his
leave shall be deemed separated from the service as of such date of expiration, subject to due
process,

13.1 Family Care Leave

Tn accordance with the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act effective August 5, 1993,
and the California Family Rights Act effective October 4, 1993, the City will grant job
protected unpaid family and medical leave to eligible workers for up to twelve (12)
weeks per twelve (12) month period for any or more of the following reasons:

A. The birth of a child and in order to care for such child or the placement of a child
with the worker for adoption or foster care (leave for this reason must be taken
within the twelve (12) month period following the child's birth or placement with
the employee); or

B. In order to care for an immediate family member (spouse, child, domestic partner
or parent) of the worker if such immediate family member has a serious health
condition. For purposes of this section, "child" is anyone under eighteen (18)
years who is the worker's biological, adopted, or foster child, stepchild, legal
ward, or an adult dependent child. "Parents" include biological, foster, and
adoptive parents, stepparents, and legal guardians; or

Cc. The worker's own serious health condition that makes the worker unable to
perform the functions of his/her position,

The following provisions apply to Family Care Leave:
Eligible worker means having been employed for the City for twelve (12) months
and having worked at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) hours during
the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the commencement of the
leave.

Medical verification is required for worker or ill family member for the medical
leave period.

Workers are required to give at least thirty (30) days written notice in the event of
a foreseeable leave. In unexpected or unforesceable situations, a worker should
provide as much written notice as is practicable.

Workers may use accrued vacation as part of the family leave period. Use of sick
leave is not required but may be used under the same regulations governing the
use of sick leave. Use of sick leave does not extend the maximum four (4) month
period of family care leave.

Should both parents work for the City, each may be granted up to twelve (12)
weeks leave.

Maternity leave under state law is accounted for separately. Pursuant to State
Law, an employee is eligible for up to four (4) months leave.

Health benefit premiums shall be made in accordance with the Federal Family and
Medical Leave Act and the California Family Rights Act. Under the current law,
the City will continue health coverage under the same conditions as coverage
would have been provided if the worker had been continuously employed during
the leave period.

Workers taking family care leave will be returned to the same or comparable job
with the same pay at the conclusion of their leave.

Family care leave will not constitute a break in service for purposes of any
employee benefit plan. Employees returning from leave shall return with no less
seniority than accumulated on the date leave began.

Where seniority is used for purposes of vacation and/or shift bidding, family care
leave shall not result in a loss of department seniority.

Probationary Period

The probationary period shall relate to the length of time it requires for an employee to become
proficient in the particular position and for the appointing authority to adequately judge the

10
 

 

 

I
i
i
5

proficiency, Recognizing that individuals and positions vary, the standard probationary period
for all positions shall be as shown:

For lateral hires and academy graduates, the probationary period shall be twelve
(12) months. This twelve (12)-month probationary period may be extended for up
to six (6) months by the Chief of Police/designee.

For recruits hired before completing the academy, the probationary period shall be
eighteen (18) months, which may be extended for up to six months by the Chief
of Police/designee.

For Dispatchers and Community Service Officers, the probationary period
shall be twelve (12) months, but may be lengthened or shortened by the
Department Head for up to six (6) months, depending on the proven
proficiency of the probationer.

Grievance And Appeal Procedures

A.
B.
Cc.
Article 15
15.1
15.2

Purpose

To promote improved employer-employee relations by establishing grievance and appeal
procedures which afford employees a systematic means of obtaining further consideration
of problems after every reasonable effort has been made to resolve them through informal
discussions with the supervisor.

To provide that grievances shall be settled as near as possible to the point of origin.

To provide that appeals shall be conducted as informally, expeditiously and fairly as
possible.

Grievance Procedure Definitions:

Grievance. Grievances shall be divided into major and minor categories with the

following meanings.
A. Major Grievances. A grievance which is a claim or dispute by an employee or his

representative concerning any action or inaction by a Department Head or City
Management claiming violation, misinterpretation, inequitable application or
noncompliance with the provisions of law, rules and regulations, Procedure
Manual or this Memorandum of Understanding as they relate to wages, hours or
other terms or conditions of employment.

Major grievances may be appealed to the Personnel Board as provided later in this
section.

11
wu

15.3

15.4

Minor Grievances, A grievance on any other matter not specifically included
above including forms of corrective action not resulting in demotion, dismissal,
reduction in pay or suspension without pay.

Minor grievances may be appealed to the Personnel Officer as provided later in
this section.

Exclusions

The following matters are specifically excluded from consideration under the
grievance and appeal procedure:

A.

B.

a 5 92

H.

Determination of contents of job classification.

Determination of the procedures and standards for employment.
Items requiring capital expenditure when not related to safety.
Items subject to the meet and confer process.

Matters subject to disciplinary proceedings set forth in Section 14 of this
Memorandum.

The procedures set for therein shall not apply in matters where other methods of
dispute resolution have specifically been provided for in State or Federal Law,
such as, but not limited to, appeal of Workers' Compensation claims;
unemployment insurance claims; or claims of employment discrimination based
upon race, religious creed, sex, color, physical disability, age, medical condition,
national origin, political affiliation or marital status for which a remedy is
provided by the California Fair Employment and Practices Act or Title VII.

Probationary employees rejected during probation shall have no right to appeal or
grieve under this MOU.

Items filed more than twenty-one (21) calendar days following the event giving
rise to the grievance or first knowledge of the grievance.

Informal Grievance Procedure

Within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the event giving rise to the grievance,
employees who have a problem or complaint should first try to get it settled through
discussion with their immediate supervisor or obtain departmental support for his or her
position if the City Manager or City Council must act. If, after this discussion, they do
not believe the problem has been satisfactorily resolved, they shall have the right to
discuss it with their supervisor's immediate superior, if any, in the management ranks,

12
 

 

 

15.5

Every effort should be made to find an accepiable solution by informal means at the
lowest possible level of supervision. If the employee is not in agreement with the
decision reached by discussion, they shall have the right to file a formal grievance in
writing after receiving the informal decision of immediate superior. An informal
grievance shall not be taken above the Department Head.

Formal Grievance Procedure

Levels of review through the chain of command are as follows:

First Level Supervisor or Division Head

Second Level Department Head

Third Level City Manager

Fourth Level Personnel Board/City Council - final judgment & disposition.

A. First Level. Not later than twenty-one (21) calendar days after the event filing rise

to the grievance, the grievance shall be prepared, signed by the employee and
presented in writing explaining the matter grieved and setting forth therein a
statement of the action desired, in sufficient detail for the supervisor to understand
the nature of the request.

The immediate supervisor or division head shall render their decision and
comments in writing and return them to the employee within seven (7) days after
receiving the grievance. If the employee does not agree with this supervisor's
decision, or if no answer has been received within seven (7) calendar days, the
employce may present the grievance in writing to their supervisor's immediate
superior. Failure of the employee to take further action within fen (10) calendar
days after receipt of the written decision of their supervisor, or within a total of
twenty-five (25) calendar days if no decision is rendered, will constitute a
dropping of the grievance.

Second Level. If a grievance involves a depariment-wide problem, it may be
presented directly to the Department Head or his or her representative within
twenty-one (21) calendar days of the event giving rise to the grievance. The
Department Head receiving the grievance shall review it, render his/her decision
and comments in writing, and return them to the employee or the employee's
representative within seven days after receiving the grievance. If the employee
does not agree with the decision, or if no answer has been received within seven
(7) days, they may present the grievance in writing to the City Manager. Failure
of the employee to take further action within fourteen (14) calendar days after
receipt of the decision, or within a total of twenty-five (25) calendar days if no
decision is rendered, will constitute a dropping of the grievance.

If the employee concerned desires to be represented by the Association at the

second level of the grievance procedure or higher, authority for such
tepresentation shall be signed by the employee and submitted to the Human

13
we

D,

Resources Director.

Third Level. For major grievances only, if deemed appropriate by either the
employee or the City Manager, a fact finding committee shall be convened. Such
committee shall be made up of a member of the City Manager's staff, an
appropriate labor unit member (not from the appellant's own unit) and a third
member selected by the two (2) original committee members from a panel of five
(5) management employees selected by the Management Association. They shall
make findings and recommendations to the City Manager prior to any further
scheduled hearing and review. In the event there is a dissenting vote by a
committee member, they may submit a minority report to the City Manager.

The City Manager shall review the findings and recommendations of the
Department Head and of any fact finding committee and may then affirm, revoke
or modify the action taken as, in his or her judgment, seems warranted. The City
Manager shall render a decision in writing to the employee within fifteen (15)
calendar days after receiving the appeal, provided that the fifteen (15)-day limit
shall be extended to provide the City Manager with a minimum of five (5)
working days after his receipt of the report of the fact finding committee to
consider its report and render their decision.

Fourth Level of Review. The Personnel Board shall act as an appeal board for
any appellant making an appeal to said Board on a major grievance.

15.6 Appeal Procedure To The Personnel Board

A.

Right to Appeal. Any Employee in the competitive service or their representative
shall, within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of written notice of City
Manager's decision, have the tight to appeal to the Personnel Board any major
grievance, except in instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited
by the personnel ordinance or this Memorandum of Understanding.

Method of Appeal. Appeals shail be in writing, signed by the appellant, and filed
with the Human Resources Director. The appeal shall be a written statement,
addressed to the Personnel Board, explaining the matter appealed from and setting
forth therein a statement of the action desired by the appellant, with reasons
therefore, in sufficient detail to enable the Board to understand the nature of the
request. The formality of a legal pleading is not required.

Hearing Date. Unless a later date is agreed to between the Chair of the Personnel
Board and the employee, the matter shall be scheduled for. hearing at the next
available regular meeting of the Personnel Board at least fifteen (15) days after
receipt of the notice of appeal.

Documentation. The appellant or appellant's representative may submit relevant
documentation or written statement for Board consideration up to three (3)

14
 

 

 

15.7

working days prior to the hearing.

The Human Resources Director shall forward the material received to members of
the Personnel Board, the department, the employee, and any representative of the
employee at least two (2) working days before the hearing.

Hearing. In order to be heard, the appellant shall appear personally unless
physically unable to do so, before the Personnel Board at the time and place of the
hearing. The hearing shall be closed unless the appellant requests an open
hearing. The hearing may be held whether or not the appellant is present.

The appellant shall present the case first and, at the conclusion, opposition matter
may then be presented. Rebuttal matter, not repetitive, may be allowed at the
discretion of the Board. Cross examination of the witnesses shall be permitted.
The conduct and decorum of the hearing shall be under the control of the Chair of
the Board, with due regard to the rights and privileges of the parties appearing
before it. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating
to evidence and witnesses.

Hearings may be continued at the discretion of the Board.

Findings and Conclusions. The Personnel Board shall render written findings and
recommendations and final decisions concerning the appeal within ten (10) days
after the matter is submitted. The decision of the Personnel Board shall be final

and conclusive unless determined otherwise by a court of competent jurisdiction.

Time Limits

The herein above time limits, at any step of this procedure, may be extended by mutual
agreement of the concerned parties.

Article 16

Disciplinary Procedure

16.1 Definition of "Disciplinary Action.”

The term “disciplinary action" shall include the following actions which may be taken by
a Department Head:

A) Tetter of reprimand issued to Police Officers, provided that no pre-
disciplinary (Skelly) proceedings are required;

B) Suspension without pay up to thirty (30) calendar days;

Cc) Withholding in-grade salary increase (merit pay) under Article 4 shall not

16
mi

16.2.

D)
E)

F)

be considered discipline and not subject to the principles of Article 14;
In-grade salary reduction;
Demotion; or

Dismissal.

Notice of Disciplinary Action

Whenever a disciplinary action other than a letter of reprimand is to be taken against an
employee, the employee shall be notified in writing of the disciplinary action to be taken
and provided with an opportunity for a pre-disciplinary “Skelly” hearing, An employee
is not entitled ta receive a pre-disciplinary “Skelly” heating upon receipt of a letter of

reprimand.

Such written notification shall include:

A)

B)

C)

D)

E)

F)

A statement of the disciplinary action to be taken against the employee;

A statement of the facts upon which the disciplinary action is based which
shall set forth clearly and with such particularity the charges against the
employee so that the employee can understand said charges;

A statement indicating the cause for the disciplinary action pursuant to the
Personnel Rules;

A statement which generally describes any actions taken against the
employee during the last five (5) years and which relates to the current
disciplinary action;

A statement advising the employee that the written notice is to be placed
in their official personnel file and that said employee has a right to appeal
to the Personnel Board.

A statement indicating that the employee will be provided with the
opportunity for a written or oral pre-disciplinary “Skelly” hearing.

The written notice of disciplinary action shall be considered to be
sufficient notice to the employee if the aforementioned information is
contained therein. The written notice of disciplinary action must be
personally served within three (3) working days from the date of said
written notice, or if unable to do so, mailed to the employee by certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last address which such
employee has furnished to the appointing authority.
|
|

 

 

 

 

 

Appeals

A.

Time for Appeal. Any employee against whom disciplinary action is taken shall
have the right to appeal from such disciplinary action; provided, however, that the
employee must deliver a written notice of appeal to the Human Resources
Department within ten (10) working days of the date that the written notice of
disciplinary action was served upon the employee. In the event the employee fails
to deliver a notice of appeal to the Human Resources Department within said ten
(10) working day period, the disciplinary action shall become final, and the
employee shall have no further right to appeal.

Notice of Appeal, Contents. The written notice of appeal filed with the Human
Resources Department shall not be required to be in any particular format;
however, it shall contain at least the following information:

QD The name and address of the employee;

2) The date of the disciplinary action and a statement to the effect that the
employee appeals from the disciplinary action; and

3) The notice of appeal shall be dated and signed by the employee or by
his/her representative.

Setting Hearing Date. When the Human Resources Department receives a notice
of appeal which complies with the requirements set forth herein, the Director of
Human Resources shall schedule the matter for hearing. For a Letter of
Reprimand, the hearing is with the Chief of Police or his/her designee. For
suspension without pay, in-grade salary reduction, demotion, or dismissal, the
hearing is scheduled at the next available regular meeting of the Personnel Board
at least fifteen (15) days afler receipt of the notice of appeal.

Findings and Conclusions. For Letters of Reprimand, the Chief of Police or
his/her designee shall render a final decision concerning the appeal following the
hearing, within ten (10) days after the matter is submitted. The decision of the
Chief of Police or his/her designee shall be final and conclusive. For suspension
without pay, in-grade salary reduction, demotion, or dismissal, the Personnel
Board shall render written findings and recommendations and final decisions
concerning the appeal following the hearing and within ten (10) days after the
matter is submitted. The decision of the Personnel Board shall be final and
conclusive unless determined otherwise by a court of competent jurisdiction.

E. Although a Letter of Reprimand does not constitute disciplinary action for

miscellaneous employees, if the employee disagrees with a Letter of Reprimand
received, he/she may discuss it with the Chief of Police or his/her designee. An
employee may also write a rebuttal, and that document will be placed in his/her

17
16.4

personnel file.
Removal of Documents from Personnel File

After a five (5) year period, if there has not been subsequent discipline, the City shall
remove from the employee’s personnel file, or any other file used by the employer for
any personnel purpose, any written record of an Internal Affairs Investigation not
resulting in “Sustained” allegations of dishonesty or moral turpitude,

After a five (5) year period, if the employee has not been involved in any subsequent
“Party Most at Fault” or “Avoidable” (“Avoidable” for purpose of administrative review
or progressive discipline) traffic collisions, the city shall remove from the employce’s
personnel file, or any other file used by the employer for any personnel purpose, any
written record of prior traffic collisions.

Article 17
Layoff Rights

17.1

17.2

Layoff Defined

Whenever, in the judgment of the City Council, it becomes necessary to abolish a
position(s), including the reduction of work hours over twenty percent (20%) per year,
the employee(s) displaced shall be deemed to be laid off (employees may accept an hour's
reduction in excess of twenty percent (20%) without exercising their layoff rights). The

rights of employees affected by the abolishment of positions by the City Council shall be
hereafter set forth in this Section.

Seniority.

Seniority for purposes of layoff need not be continuous and shall include total
accumulated length of service under the following types of appointment:

A. Emergency appointment under SMMC 2.57.60(h) or previous SMMC Section
2.57.020 (11).

B. Regular appointment under SMMC 2.57.080.
Cc. Provisional appointment under SMMC 2.57.070(d).

D. Appointment as City Manager's assistants under SMMC 2.57.060(a) from a
position in the classified service.

E. Appointment as a Department Head under SMMC 2.57.060(d) from a position in
the classified service.

18
 

 

 

17.3

17.4

17.5

In the case of ties, seniority shall be determined on the basis of greater hire date seniority,
then by random number if necessary.

Seniority for Layoff Purposes

A The least senior employee in the classification from which the position is
abolished is to be first laid off. Prior to layoff of regular employees, temporary
and/or provisional employees in the same classification will be laid off first. For
purposes of initial layoff, seniority means time in the classification in question.
Flexibly staffed positions will be considered a single classification for layoff
purposes.

B. For the purposes of Section 17.3 (Bumping Rights) seniority is defined as
seniority within the classification and seniority in a directly related higher
classification, i.e., a classification that is within the promotional line and has a
higher salary.

Bumping Rights

Employees laid off may elect to be reassigned to a formerly held classification in any
Unit held by an employee with less seniority as defined in 17.1, provided the following
conditions are met:

A. The formerly held classification exists and has positions allocated and budgeted.
Formerly held position includes successor classification if determined by the City
to exist. A successor classification exists where the Personnel Board has changed
the title of a position or included new duties in the same titled classification,
provided that a competitive test was not thereafter given for the retitled or re-
dutied classification.

B. The employee has the ability to perform the essential functions of the formerly
held classification. Qualifications may be tested by the City, as described in the
current job description.

on If employees have more than one (1) formerly held City classification, they shall
bump to the classification most recently held; the employee may bump into
another formerly held classification if no position is available in the "most
recently held" classification.

Mutually Agreed Upon Transfer

The City and an employee who has been laid off or bumped may agree to an appointment
to a classification that has a vacant position without the need for competitive testing. The
following conditions shall apply:

A. The City may test the ability of the employee for the position prior to City's

19
wo

17.6

17.7

17.8

decision on whether it will mutually agree to the transfer;

B. The appointment shall be subordinate to the bumping rights of other employees
and may not be used to prevent another employee from having access to the
vacant position if permitted by the bumping provisions.

Severance Package

In the event there is not a less senior, formerly held position for the employee to access
through layoff or bumping, the employee will be provided a severance package equal to
two (2) weeks’ pay for each. complete year of service, to a maximum of six (6) months’
pay.

This severance package shall be in addition to any other buyouts and/or severance
payments to which the employee is entitled under their MOU.

In addition to providing severance as described in Section 17.5, the City shall make
arrangements to provide employees laid off with job search assistance for forty-five (45)
days following the effective date of layoff. Job search assistance shall include job and
career counseling, resume preparation, and job search assistance at City expense.

Salary in Event of Change Due to Layoff

An employee's rate of compensation in the event of position change resulting from layoff
shall be the salary step in the classification to which the employee is laid off which is
closest to the base salary received immediately prior to layoff.

Notice of Layoff

The City will notice the employee to be laid off and the employees who will be impacted
by bumping by registered mail or hand delivery. Affected employee organizations shall
be noticed concurrently by registered mail. The notice shall be sent to the mailing
address as shown on the employee's last paycheck unless a more recent address has been
provided to Human Resources by the employee, After notice to the employee and
employee organizations, the names of employees to whom layoff notices have been sent
will be posted at the Human Resources Department in City Hall. The notice shall state
the layoff action to be taken, the options available to the employee, reemployment rights,
and layoff procedures. Employees shail have ten (10) calendar days to inform the Human
Resources Department in writing of the decisions on options stated in the notice. In the
event employees fail to state their decision, the City shall select an option and City's
decision shail not be subject to appeal. City shall select an option that retains
employment with the City if such option exists. The failure to receive notice shall not be
grounds to set aside actions taken.

20
 

17.9

17.10

Effective Date of Layoff

A layoff shall be effective thirty (30) calendar days after notice is mailed to the
employee, unless a later effective date is stated in the notice. An appeal shall not modify
the effective date, provided, however, that where an appeal is successful and the layoff is
nullified the employee shall be provided salary and benefits as if there was not a layoff.

Appeal .

An employee may not appeal the decision to layoff their position, but may appeal the
order of layoff, the bumping provisions (except the test or results of a test of
qualifications), and the seniority computation by filing a written appeal with the Human
Resources Department stating the basis of the appeal. An appeal must be filed within
fourteen (14) calendar days of mailing of notice. The appeal shall be heard by the City
Manager or his/her designee within ten (10) calendar days of filing the appeal. A
decision will be rendered within ten (10) calendar days of the hearing. Notice will be
given by first class mail to the employee and to his/her Unit. A further appeal to the
Personnel Board may be filed within five (5) calendar days of mailing by filing a written
appeal with the Human Resources Department stating the basis for the appeal. The
hearing will be held within ten (10) calendar days of the filing of the appeal or as soon
thereafter as a quorum of the Board may be gathered and a decision rendered within five
(5) calendar days of the hearing,

Article 18
Recall and Reinstatement

18.1

18.2

Eligibility

Employees shall be entitled to recall rights to the position from which they were laid off
or bumped for a period of two (2) consecutive years from the effective date of layoff or
bumping. The effective date of layoff or bumping shall be the employee's last day of
work in the classification from which the employee is laid

off or bumped.

Order of Recall and Reinstatement

When a vacancy occurs in a job classification, laid off or bumped employees eligible to
return to that job classification shall be recalled in the inverse order of bump or layoff.
Permanent employees who were laid off or bumped are eligible to return to the job
classification in which permanent status was held, Employees reinstated under this
Section shall not be subject to a new probationary period. Probationary employees who
did not have permanent status at the time of layoff shall be required to serve the
remainder of any probationary period upon recall.

21
me

18.3 Notice

When a vacancy exists and employees are to be recalled, notice of the opening(s) shall be
sent to the mailing address as shown on the employee's last paycheck unless a more
recent address has been furnished by the laid off/bumped employee.. To expedite recall,
more than one employee may be notified of an opening.

The employee shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to reply to City from the date of
mailing of the recall notice. If the employee fails to respond within fourteen (14)
calendar days of notice to the City, he/she shal! lose all recall rights.

18.4 Credit for Previous Service upon Reinstatement

18.5

18.6

Employees reinstated under this Section shall receive credit for former employment in
computing salary, vacation, and other benefits.

Benefits Calculation upon Reinstatement

Employees reinstated after layoff shall be treated as though they have been on leave of
absence without pay in computing salary, vacation, sick leave and other benefits.

Qualifications Required for Reinstatement

The tight to reinstatement is contingent upon the ability of the employee to perform the
essential functions of the position to which the employee is being returned.

18.7 Contact Information for Notice

It is the responsibility of the employee who has been laid off to keep the City informed of
their address and telephone number. The City has no responsibility to attempt to trace an
employee if notice of reinstatement is not delivered by the Post Office.

18.8 Meet-and Confer

Upon request, the City shall meet and confer with affected employee organizations on the
impact of any layoffs occurring pursuant to this policy. Furthermore, the City will notify
employee organizations of possible layoffs as soon as is reasonably possible, and afford
the organization(s) the opportunity to provide options/alternatives to layoffs for
consideration by the City Council prior to the Council reaching a final decision.

Article 19
Number Of Names To Be Certified on Reemployment

When a reinstatement list is used to fill a vacancy or vacancies, the Human Resources Director
shall certify from the top of such list the number of names equal to the number of vacancies to be

22
 

 

filled. The appointing authority shall then appoint such person or persons to fill the vacancies.

Classified employees who are laid off or demoted in lieu of layoff and who are still interested in
reinstatement on the expiration of the reinstatement list, shall be entitled to be reinstated to his or
her former classification for a period of one (1) year provided there is a vacancy, all
reinstatement lists have been exhausted, and they have the highest layoff seniority. Employees
reinstated under this Section shall not be subject to a new probationary period and shall receive
credit for former employment in computing salary, vacation, sick leave and other benefits.

Article 20
Reemployment

Any past, present or future permanent employee, separated from a position through resignation
and without fault of delinquency on his part may be reemployed to the former position, or to
another position in the same class, within two (2) years, provided there is an authorized vacancy
and the employee meets the requirements for employment, upon the recommendation of the
reemploying Department Head.

Employees reemployed under this Section shall be subject to a probationary period and may
receive credit for former employment in determining the amount of vacation allowance, sick
leave, other benefits and their step in the salary range upon the recommendation of the
reemploying Department Head.

Article 21
Americans With Disabilities Act

The City will be in full compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) and shall,
consistent with ADA, provide reasonable accommodation to employees with disabilities.

Article 22
Police Weight Room

The City and Police Officers Association recognize the value and importance of physical fitness,
An exercise room will be maintained and made available to Police Department personnel only.

Article 23

Community Service Officers’ (CSO) and Dispatchers’ Shift Schedules

Every reasonable effort shall be made to ensure that the schedule of working hours for
Community Service Officers assigned to Field Operations (Patrol) and Dispatchers will remain
in the current “4/10” Four (4) Day / Ten (10) hour format. The Police Chief may terminate this

23
mo

program at any time after providing written notice of schedule change to the Police Officers’
Association and meeting and conferring about the impact of this decision. Both the City and the
Police Officers’ Association recognize that unpredictable events, such as illness and terminations
can affect scheduling, and that the longer in advance a schedule is posted, the greater the chance
that a change in schedule may occur,

Article 24 .

Community Service Officers’ and Dispatchers’ Break Between Shifts

The City shall make every reasonable effort to schedule Community Service Officers’ regular
shift assignments with at least ten (10) hours between shifts, The City shall make every

reasonable effort to schedule Dispatchers’ shift assignments with at least eight (8) hours in
between shifts.

Article 25
Duty Differentials

25.1 Bomb Unit

The Chief may establish a bomb unit. Officer(s) assigned this hazardous detail shall
receive three percent (3%) biweekly in addition to his/her regular pay.

25.2 Standby Pay

Officers placed on standby alert by the Police Chief or their designee shall receive extra
compensation at the rate of twelve and one-half percent (12 1/2%) of their hourly rate.

For purposes of this section, standby alert shall include "on call" status by detectives or
other Officers designated by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

25.3. Canine Differential

Officers assigned canine responsibilities will receive two (2) hours credit which will
acerue at the level of three hours (to comply with FLSA) leave per work week, in
recognition of the time spent in the care, grooming, feeding, and activities related to
canine handling.

25.4 Qther Duty Differentials
Officers assigned to Traffic Detail, Canine, PAL/Youth Services, Downtown Unit,

Training Manager, Crime Reduction Unit, and School Resource assignments shall receive
3% biweekly in addition to their regular pay.

24
 

 

 

 

25.5

25.6

25.7

A three percent (3%) work differential will be paid to those Detectives in the
Investigative Services Division, to include when assigned full-time to an outside Task
Force.

Training Differential

Police Officers assigned as field training officers shall receive eight percent (8%)
biweekly in addition to their regular pay for such duty and associated overtime.

Community Service Officers - in non-specialty assignments who are assigned training of
field CSO’s - shall receive eight percent (8%) biweekly in addition to their regular pay
for such duty and associated overtime.

When the manager/sergeant responsible for the communications center assigns a non-
Senior Dispatcher to serve as a member of the Training Team, he/she will receive a 5%
differential while training entry-level probationary Dispatchers relative to the technical
dispatch duties. Dispatchers who are not part of the Training Team are not eligible to
receive the differential.

Bilingual Differential

Based on the City and community need and the language proficiency of the employee,
the Human Resources Director may approve bilingual pay for Police Officers’
Association classifications upon the recommendation of the Department Head. Approval
will only be given where the employee’s bilingual skill is regularly used. in the course of
City business.

Bilingual premium pay shall be $181.96 biweekly for eligible Police Officers, $125.44
for eligible Community Service Officers and $90.00 biweekly for cligible Senior
Dispatchers/Dispatchers, and shall become payable the first day of the pay period
following proficiency certification. Effective October 11, 2015, bilingual premium pay
shall be increased to $200.00 biweekly for eligible Police Officers and $138.46 biweekly
for eligible Community Service Officers, Senior Dispatchers and Dispatchers. If a
bilingual qualified employee works less than full-time, the biweekly differential will be
prorated, If an employee is off work for over 30 consecutive calendar days, he/she will
not receive the bilingual differential for the remainder of the leave; this will not take
effect if the employee is out on 4850 disability leave.

In order to ensure that employees retain bilingual proficiency, a periodic requalification
may be required and will be administered by the Human Resources Department.

Community Service Officer — Differential
A. A Community Service Officer serving in one of the positions designated in this

subsection shall receive an eight percent (8%) increment/differential above his or
her base salary for the regular position of Community Service Officer. This

25
ms

dD.

increment/differential will be on base salary which does not include any other
differential such as bilingual pay, etc.

The Chief of Police shail have exclusive authority to appoint or to remove at
his/her pleasure Community Service Officers assigned to the following areas:
Investigations; Court Liaison; Traffic; and Support Services.

Neither appointment to nor removal from such assignments shall be considered to
be a grievance or discipline and no appeal may be taken from the Chiefs
decision.

Up to six (6) positions may be assigned by the Chief of Police. The Chief shall
not be obligated to fill all six (6) positions.

25.8 Shift Differential

Employees in the classifications of Dispatcher I/II and Senior Dispatcher who work sixty
percent (60%) or more of a shift between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., including trades, shall
be compensated by the payment of an additional five percent (5%) of their base pay for
that shift. Shift differential does not apply to overtime hours worked.

Article 26

Master Officer

The purpose of the Master Office Program is to recognize those officers who have distinguished
themselves at the highest level of professionalism through specialized skills and who exhibit the
highest degree of productivity and leadership by utilizing their specialized skills in their day-to-

day activities.

Qualification Requirements:

A. Master Officer I

Eligible after seven (7) years of San Mateo Police Department service as a Police
Officer.

Possession of an Advanced POST Certificate.

Accumulation of two (2) “points” of specialty assignments.

Receives/Maintains an “exceeds standards” yearly evaluation.

Is approved as a Master Officer by the Master Officer Review Panel.

Paid a 3.0% differential.

B. Master Officer IT

Eligible afier fourteen (14) years of San Mateo Police Department service as a
Police Officer.

Possession of an Advanced POST Certificate.

Accumulation of three (3) “points” of specialty assignments.

26
Receives/Maintains an “exceeds standards” yearly evaluation.
Is approved as a Master Officer by the Master Officer Review Panel.
Paid an additional 2.0% differential, for a total of 5% differential.

B. Master Officer III

Eligible after twenty-one (21) years of San Mateo Police Department service as a
Police Officer.

Possession of an Advanced POST Certificate.

Accumulation of four (4) “points” of specialty assignments.

Receives/Maintains an “exceeds standards” yearly evaluation.

Is approved as a Master Officer by the Master Officer Review Panel.

Paid an additional 2.0% differential, for a total of 7% differential.

All earned Master Officer Differentials will be paid in addition to any other earned

differentials.
Article 27
Holidays
27.1 The holidays to be observed are as follows:
! A. New Year's Day January 1st.
B. Martin Luther King's Birthday 3rd Monday in January
Cc. Presidents’ Day 3rd Monday in February
D. Memorial Day Last Monday in May
E, Independence Day July 4th
F Labor Day 1st Monday in September
G. Veteran's Day November 11
H. Thanksgiving Day 4th Thursday in November
I. Day after Thanksgiving
J. Christmas Day December 25th
kK. Every day approved by the City Council as a public holiday, public fast,
thanksgiving or day of mourning.
L. Floating holidays are to be taken on working days mutually agreeable to the
employee and the department. CSO’s and sworn safety personnel receive three
(3) floating holidays annually.
27.2 Weekend Holidays

When a holiday falls on Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed. Employees
who are not assigned a special holiday schedule shall be compensated for established
holidays that fall on a Saturday by permitting approximately one-half (1/2) of the
employees to celebrate the holiday on the Friday immediately preceding the Saturday
holiday and the balance of the employees to celebrate the holiday on the following

27
is

27.3

27.4

27.5

27.6

Monday. The employees shall receive seven calendar days’ notice of the holiday
schedule. City offices shall remain open on both days. If it is inconvenient to grant
either day as a holiday, the equivalent time off shall be granted under the conditions
provided in Section 27.5,

Special Holiday Schedule

Employees who are assigned a special holiday schedule because they cannot take
holidays when they fall shall be compensated for holidays as follows:

A. Such employees shall be compensated for thirteen (13) holidays a year by the
granting of 4.0 hours of holiday credit per pay period. Such time off shall be
taken off under the conditions specified in Section 27.5.

B. Such employees shall be compensated for special holidays declared by competent
authority by the granting of equivalent time off under the conditions specified in
Section 27.5.

Other merit system employees shall be compensated for holidays authorized or those

declared by competent authority by the granting of equivalent time off under the
conditions specified in Section 27.5,

Holidays Worked

If employees are required by the City to work on any of the above holidays, they shall be
granted equivalent time off for holiday compensation under the following conditions:

A, Such time off shall be taken at the discretion of the Department Head, with due
regard for the desires of the employee and the workload of the department.

B. Such equivalent time off shall never accumulate to more than forty (40) hours.

Tn the event one (1) or more holidays fall within an annual vacation leave of an employee
who receives holiday time off, such holidays shall not be charged as vacation leave.

Holiday Payment

Employees off probation who have taken, or are scheduled to take, at least eighty (80)
hours of vacation during a fiscal year may, at their option, be compensated for up to-one
hundred four (104) hours of accumulated holiday, vacation or annual leave or a
combination thereof at the employee's established rate of pay plus all applicable
differentials.

28
Article 28
Vacation

28.1 City Policy

Vacations are considered essential to the employee's welfare and they are granted by the
City to allow employees relaxation and rest from their duties. Therefore, it shall be the
policy of the City not to allow the excess accumulation of vacation leave.

All full-time regular employees shall be entitled to annual leave with pay as provided
below.

28.2 Vacation Allowance: Non-Safety

A. Each non-safety employee shall be granted eighty (88) hours credit for vacation
with pay on the day following completion of one (1) year of continuous service.
Thereafter, for each additional biweekly pay period of service, the employee shall
accrue vacation with pay at the beginning of the following biweekly pay period as
follows:

YEARS OF SERVICE PAID LEAVE HOURS BIWEEKLY ACCRUAL

 

| 1 through 3 years 88 hours 3.39 hours
| 4 through 9 years 128 hours 4.92 hours
i 10th year 136 hours 5.23 hours

11th year 144 hours 5.54 hours
i 12th year 160hours 6.16 hours
i 13th through 23rd years 180 hours 6.93 hours
t 24th year and beyond 200 hours 7.69 hours

 

The above allowances shall be prorated for employees beginning employment or leaving
employment with the City during a biweekly pay period.

28.3 Vacation for Safety Employees
All merit system employees classified as safety employees by the Public Employees!
Retirement System, shall be entitled to an annual paid vacation after completion of

continuous service with the City as follows:

YEARS OF SERVICE PAID LEAVE HOURS BIWEEKLY ACCRUAL

1 through 3 years 88 hours 3.39 hours
: 4 through 9 years 128 hours 4.92 hours

10th year 136 hours 5.23 hours
: 11th year 144 hours 5.54 hours
: 12th year 160 hours 6.16 hours
i 13th through 23rd yeats 180 hours 6.93 hours
: 24th year and beyond 200 hours 7.69 hours

29
mo

28.4

28.5

28,6

28,7

28.8

Vacation Accumulation

Employees may not accrue more than two (2) times their annual vacation leave at the end
of any biweekly pay period without loss of vacation days unless specifically approved by
the Department Head. In the event the City is unable to schedule vacation and an
employee is subject to loss of accrued earnings, the employee shall be permitted to utilize
such vacation prior to such loss.

Continuous Service Defined

A. Continuous service shall mean service in the classified service in any
classification since original regular appointment, excluding any time prior to a
break in service.

B. As used in this Section, year of completed continuous service shall include, but
not be limited to, all time while the employee is on sick leave and/or vacation pay.

Cc. Neither military leave nor leave of absence without pay shall constitute an
interruption in computing continuous service. However, leaves of absence
without pay of over one month shall not be included when computing length of
continuous service for vacation purposes,

Vacation Scheduling

The time at which employees may take their vacation shall be determined by the
Department Head, with due regard for the wishes of the employee and the needs of the
service. However, the City recognizes that premium vacation time is a sought-after
commodity, and therefore agrees that to the extent possible, vacation shall be allowed for
at least two (2) police officers at a time from each of the four (4) shifts.

Amount Of Vacation Time
Employees may use only the vacation to their credit with the following exception:

Vacation Emergency

The Department Head is authorized to grant use of up to two (2) days vacations in
advance of accrual only in instances where vacationing employees are unavoidably
detained through no fault of their own and the employee has no other accrued leave
credits.

Vacation Pay Advance

The City shall approve a vacation advance for an employee if requested by the employee
seven (7) days before the date the payment is to be made. The amount shall be seventy-

30
 

 

five percent (75%) of the previous net paycheck.

28.9 Proportionate Vacation
A merit system employee who works part-time shall accrue vacation at a proportionate
rate of full-time credit.

28.10 Vacation Allowance For Terminated Employees
Employees who terminate shall be paid the straight-time salary equivalent in a lump sum
for all accrued vacation leave earned.

28.11 Vacation Payment
Employees off probation who have taken, or are scheduled to take, at least eighty (80)
hours of vacation during a fiscal year may, at their option, be compensated for up to one
hundred and four (104) hours of accumulated vacation, annual leave or holiday or a
combination thereof at the employee's established rate of pay plus all applicable
differentials.

Article 29

Sick Leave

29.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to continue the compensation of employees who must
remain off their jobs because of illness or disability. Such sick leave is a privilege which
employees can exercise in the event of their bona fide illness or disability or in the event
his/her presence away from work is essential because of illness, death or disability of
immediate members of their family.

29.2 Sick Leave Accrual
For full-time regular and probationary employees, sick leave shall be accrued at the rate
of three and seven tenths (3.7) hours for each biweekly pay period of service, or ninety-
six (96) hours per year. Unused sick leave shall be accumulated.
Any employee who is on paid leave shall continue to earn sick leave credit. An
employee who is on leave without pay shall not accrue sick leave credits. Sick leave
shall accrue during an absence which is a result of occupational disability resulting from
City service.

29.3 Doctor's Certification

A Department Head is responsible for determining that only bona fide personal or family

34
ma

29.4

29.5

29.6

sick leave is taken, consistent with standards established by the Director of Human
Resources.

A docior’s certification shall be required in all cases where the period of absence exceeds
five (5) working days. The submission of the doctor’s certification may be required in
other individual cases, regardless of the length of absence where, in the opinion of the
department head, evidence exists that sick leave has been misused and a prior warning
has been given to the worker regarding the abuse of sick leave.

Family Sick Leave

Family sick leave may be taken, and if taken, shall be charged to sick leave or, with the
concurrence of the department head, to vacation, holiday, or earned time off (ETO) leave,
where the presence of the employee elsewhere is essential because of illness or disability
of immediate members of their family. Not more than seventy-two (72) hours of such
family sick leave shall be granted in any one (1) year.

Family means parent, spouse, domestic partner, son, daughter, domestic partner’s child,
sibling, stepchildren, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparents and grandchildren.
However, if extenuating circumstances exist at the discretion of the Department Head and
Human Resources Director, a reasonable extension of the seventy-two (72) hour limit
may be granted by the Department Head. Any additional leave so granted shall be
charged against the employee's accumulated sick leave.

Extended Sick Leave

After one (1) year of continuous merit system service, employees who have exhausted all
earned leave benefits may be granted extended sick leave pay at the rate of seventy-five
percent (75%) of regular salary upon the recommendation of the Department Head.

After each thirty (30) calendar days of such sick leave, each case requiring additional sick
leave shall be reviewed by the Department Head and Human Resources Director, and
approved by the Personnel Officer. Such extended sick leave shall not be charged to the
employee's future sick leave accumulation during this period of extended sick leave.

Bereavement Leave

In the event of a death in the immediate family, workers may take accrued sick leave of
up to three (3) days, or up to five (5) days at the discretion of the employee’s Department
Head, in the event of a death of an immediate member of his/her family. Bereavement
Leave shall be tracked separately from Family Sick Leave. At the employee’s request,
and at the discretion of the employee’s Department Head, additional time off can be
taken and charged to vacation, holiday or compensatory time balances.

In this context only, immediate family shall be defined as: spouse, domestic partner,
child, foster. child who resided with the employee at the time of his/her death, stepchild,
mother, father, stepmother, stepfather, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother, stepbrother,

32
 

sister, stepsister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, spouse’s
grandmother, spouse’s grandfather, son-in-law, daughter-in-law or grandchildren.

Article 30
Annual Leave Program

Permanent employees who have successfully completed probation may elect to participate in the

Annual Leave Program in lieu of the sick leave/ vacation programs.

A. Implementation. Effective November 1, 1999, and each November thereafter,
permanent employees in the Unit will be offered the opportunity. annually to
transfer between the sick leave/vacation leave program and the annual leave
program. The option to change shall become effective as of the beginning of the

first full pay period in January, of each year.

B. Any employee transferring into the annual leave program who exceeds six (6)
working days of sick leave over a two (2) year average will be required to charge
sick leave usage to annual leave balance until the twenty-four (24) months
average falls below six (6) working days for a period of twelve (12) months. Paid
leave benefits under the Annual Leave Program will be as follows:

a9) Non-Safety Employees

 

 

YEARS OF SERVICE PAID LEAVE HOURS* BAW ACCRUAL
1 through 3 years 136 hours 5.23 hours
4 through 9 years 176 hours 6.77 hours
10th year 184 hours 7.08 hours
11th year 192 hours 7.38 hours
12th year 208 hours 8.00 hours
13th through 23rd yrs. 228 hours 8.77 hours
24th yr. and beyond 248 hours 9.54 hours
2) Safety Employees
YEARS OF SERVICE PAID LEAVE HOURS* BiW ACCRUAL
1 through 3 years 136 hours 5.23 hours
4 through 9 years 176 hours 6.77 hours
10th year 184 hours 7.08 hours
11th year 192 hours 7.38 hours
12thyear 208 hours 8.00 hours
13th through 23rd yrs. 228 hours 8.77 hours
24" yr. and beyond 248 hours 9.54 hours
3) Present Accrual Rates. Vacation and sick leave credits do not accrue on

the annual leave program.

33
in

4)

5)

6)

7)

8)

9)

10)

1)

12)

13)

14)

Maximum Accrual. Employees may not accrue more than two times their
annual leave as of the first of any pay period without loss of annual leave
days unless specifically approved by the Department Head.

Sick Leave Balance Upon Conversion, Any balance of sick leave hours
shall be retained by the employee. Sick leave hours shall be retained until
used or paid in accordance to Memorandum of Understanding. The
maximum sick leave hours which can be converted for payment upon

* retirement under annual leave is one hundred fifty (150) days.

Vacation Balance Upon Conversion. Any balance of vacation hours shall
be added to annual leave. Said hours shall be subject to the conditions
outlined herein for annual leave usage.

Employee Illness. Annual leave may be used for employee illness upon
the approval of the Department Head.

Family Leave. Annual leave may be used for family leave purposes with
the approval of the Department Head.

Vacation Leave. Annual leave may be used for vacation or other personal
reasons at the convenience of the department with the approval of the
Department Head.

Increments Taken. Annual leave may be taken in increments of one (1)
hour.

Payoff Upon Separation. Employees shall be paid for all accrued annual
leave credits upon separation in good standing from City service.

Effective with the first full pay period in January, 1992, the limit for
payment for unused accumulated sick leave for employees participating in
the annual leave program upon service retirement shall be raised from one
hundred twenty (120) days to one hundred fifty (150) days at fifty percent
(50%) of the total number of days accumulated; ic., a maximum of
seventy-five (75) days.

Annual Leave Advance, The City shall approve an annual leave advance
for vacation purposes to an employee if requested by the employee seven.
(7) days before the date the payment is to be made. The amount shall be
seventy-five percent (75%) of the previous net paycheck.

Proportionate Annual Leave. A merit system employee who works part-
time shall accrue annual leave at a proportionate rate of full-time credit.
 

 

 

 

15)

16)

17)

18)

Annual Leaye Payment, Employees with over five (5) years of service
who have taken, or are scheduled to take, at least eighty (80) hours of
annual leave during a fiscal year may, at their option, be compensated for
up to one hundred and four (104) hours of accumulated annual leave,
vacation or holiday or a combination thereof at the employee's
established rate of pay.

Annual Leave - Illness - Doctor's Certificate, A Department Head is
responsible for determining that only bona fide personal or family sick
leave is taken, consistent with standards established by the Personnel
Officer.

a) A Department Head may require the employee on sick leave to
submit a doctor's certification that the illness or disability is bona
fide.

b) The doctor's certification shall be required in all cases where the
period of absence exceeds five (5) working days. The submission
of the doctor's certification may be required in other individual
cases, regardless of the length of absence, where, in the opinion of
the Department Head, evidence exists that sick leave has been
misused and a prior warning has been given to the employee
regarding the abuse of sick leave.

Family Sick Leave. Family sick leave may be taken and, if taken, shall be
charged to annual leave where the presence of the employee elsewhere is
essential because of illness, death, or disability of immediate members of
his family. Not more than seventy-two (72) hours of such family sick
leave shall be granted in any one year. However, if extenuating
circumstances exist in the opinion of the Department Head, a reasonable
extension of the seventy-two (72) hour limit may be granted. Additional
leave so granted shall be charged against the employee's accumulated sick
or annual leave, at the employee's option.

Family means parent, spouse, domestic partner, son, daughter, domestic
partner’s child, sibling, stepchildren, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
grandparents and grandchildren.

Extended Annual Leave for Illness. After one (1) year of continuous merit
system service, employees who have exhausted their earned annual leave
benefits may be granted extended sick leave pay at the rate of seventy-five
percent (75%) of regular salary upon the recommendation of the
Department Head. After each thirty (30) calendar days of such sick leave,
each case requiring additional sick leave shall be reviewed by the
Department Head and Human Resources Director, and approved by the
Personnel Officer. Such extended sick leave shall not be charged to the

36
it

employee's future annual leave accumulation during this period of
extended annual leave.

19) Bereavement Leave. In the event of a death in the immediate family,
workers may take accrued sick leave or annual leave of up to three (3)
days, or up to five (5) days at the discretion of the employee’s Department
Head, in the event of a death of an immediate member of his/her family.
Bereavement Leave shall be tracked separately from Family Sick Leave.

In this context only, immediate family shall be defined as: spouse,
domestic partner, child, foster child who resided with the employee at the
time of his/her death, stepchild, mother, father, stepmother, stepfather,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother, stepbrother, sister, stepsister,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, spouse’s
grandmother, spouse’s grandfather, son-in-law, daughter-in-law or
grandchildren.

Article 31
Accumulation of Vacation, Sick Leave, and Holiday Credits

Vacation, sick leave, and holiday credits shall be made on a pro rata basis to an employee in
accordance to regular hours (non-overtime) on the payroll. Credit shall not be received for time
off without pay.

Article 32
Daily Hour Value

The hour value of a leave day for holidays, annual leave, or other leave shall be determined by
dividing the average number or regularly scheduled weekly hours by five (5), which result

provides the ratio of hours of all weekly hour schedules to the five (5) day — forty (40) hour per
week employee.

Article 33
Benefits

33.1 Life Insurance

The City shall provide employees with fifty thousand dollars — ($50,000) life insurance
effective April 1, 2002, without regard to membership in any health plan.

36
 

 

 

33,2

33.3

33.4.

AD&D Insurance

The City shall provide employees a ten thousand dollars ($10,000) accidental death and
dismemberment (twenty-four (24)-hour coverage) insurance policy without regard to
membership in any health plan.

Health Insurance

The City shail make contributions on behalf of those employees eligible for Group
Medical Coverage, or Medicare, Part B under the various plans available to the City in
the amounts necessary to a maximum contribution of one hundréd sixty dollars ($160.00)
per employee per month.

The City shall contract with the Public Employees! Retirement System to make available
to eligible current and retired employees benefits equal to the State Employees! Medical
and Hospital Care Act.

If, during the term of this agreement, a health plan is mandated by the Federal
Government, the City and the Association agree to open negotiations on the subject of
possible modification of the health plan only. [t is understood that in case of such
mandated health plan, the City shall be liable for up to the mandated cost or the amounts
specified above, whichever is higher.

Pool Money

It is understood that during the term of this contract, the City may seek expert opinion as .
to the parameters of this plan and all contributions to pool outlined below are contingent
upon compliance with state and federal rules and regulations. The Parties agree to meet
and confer if any part of this structure is found to be noncompliant.

Pool Money for Merit Employees:

Waive Coverage:

Effective January 6, 2013, employees who waive health insurance entirely shall receive
$100.00 per month as part of their salary. Effective January 3, 2016, employees who
waive health insurance entirely shall receive $160.00 per month as part of their salary.

Single Coverage:

Effective January 6, 2013, for employees choosing Single coverage, the employee’s
monthly pool money distribution will cover 100% at the Single Party level for the cost of
the least expensive HMO plan covering Bay Area health care providers offered under the
PEMHCA contract. Effective January 3, 2016, for employees choosing Single coverage,
the employee’s monthly pool money distribution will cover 100% at the Single Party
level for the Kaiser Bay Area plan covering Bay Area health care providers offered under
the PEMHCA contract.

37
33.5

33.6

33.7

Two Party Coverage:

Effective January 6, 2013, for employees choosing 2-Party coverage, the employce’s
monthly pool money distribution will cover 90% at the 2-Party level for the least
expensive HMO plan covering Bay Area health care providers offered under the
PEMHCA contract. Effective January 3, 2016, for employees choosing 2-Party coverage,
the employee’s monthly pool money distribution will cover 90% at the 2-Party level for
ihe Kaiser Bay Area plan covering Bay Area health care providers offered under the
PEMHCA contract

Family Coverage:

Effective January 6, 2013, for employees choosing Family coverage, the employee’s
monthly pool money distribution will cover 90% at the Family level up to the least
expensive HMO plan covering Bay Area health care providers offered under the
PEMHCA contract. Effective January 3, 2016, for employees choosing Family coverage,
the employee’s monthly pool money distribution will cover 90% at the Family level for
the Kaiser Bay Area plan covering Bay Area health care providers offered under the
PEMHCA contract.

Cafeteria Plan

The parties are aware that the City's Cafeteria Plan of benefits may be impacted by recent
and ongoing changes in tax law. The City agrees to mect and confer regarding proposed
changes in the structure of the Plan prior to making changes. The level of benefits and
City's contribution shall not be open to re-negotiation. Benefits shall be taxed as required
by law.

Dental Insurance

The City shall provide dental benefits consistent with the basic plan provided as of July 1,
1997, for the employee and eligible dependents during the term of this Agreement.
Effective September 1, 1999, the City shall increase the maximum annual reimbursement
in the dental insurance program to three thousand dollars ($3000) and add Orthodontics
coverage with a fifty percent (50%) life-time maximum of two thousand dollars ($2000).
Effective April 1, 2002, employees and eligible dependents shall be covered by a
100/80/80 UCR plan.

Vision Insurance
The City shall provide vision benefits consistent with that provided for other City Unions.
The carrier of this plan is. Vision Service Plan (VSP) and the plan coverage is Plan C

which provides exam, lenses and frames annually with a twenty-five dollars ($25)
employee co-payment.

38
33.8 Long Term Disability (LTD

As of September 1, 1999, the City no longer provides Long Term Disability Insurance for
this Union. Members are currently paying for LTD benefits through their PORAC
membership.

Article 34
Economic Benefits other than Salary

34.1 Mileage Allowance

City employees who must use their private vehicles for official business shall be
compensated at the IRS rate. For purposes of this section "official business” includes
court appearances. Mileage shall be measured from the San Mateo Police Department to
court or from the employee's home to court, whichever is the shorter distance.

34.2 Uniform and Equipment Allowance

A Initial Uniform Allowance

Prior to graduation from the Police Academy or upon hire for CSO’s and lateral
entry officers, the City shall provide uniforms which shall consist of the
following:

Police Safety Personnel
1 long sleeve shirt w/patch
2 short sleeve shirts w/patch
2 pairs of pants w/braid.

1 car coat w/patch

I tie

1 belt

1 hat and cap piece

1 white shirt

1 pair shoes or boots

eee wree ee ee

Community Service Officers
1 long sleeve shirt w/patch
2 short sleeve shirts w/patch
2 pairs of pants
1 car coat w/patch

1 belt

1 pair shoes or boots

 

eoeereev en

Tf a new hire fails to successfully complete probation, the uniform will be returned to the

39
wt

34.3

City.

Police Damage Reimbursement

Employees of the Police Department shall be reimbursed the reasonable value of
any personal equipment or clothing damaged or destroyed in discharging duties
under stress or strain where normal caution cannot be exercised.

Repair or Replacement of Damaged Uniform Items and Personal Property

The City agrees to reimburse employees in the Police Department for the repair or
replacement of uniform items, and for other personal property damaged, lost, or
stolen in the course of employment and performance of their assigned duties,
other than normal wear and tear in accordance with the policy provisions as set
forth in the Police Department's General Orders.

Uniform Allowance

The uniform allowance for Police Officers shall be $32.70 per pay period and
$25.00 per pay period for Community Service Officers. Effective October 11,
2015, uniform allowance. will increase to $34.81 per pay period for Police
Officers and $27.11 per pay period for Community Service Officers. Effective
July 30, 2017, uniform allowance will increase to $38.46 per pay period for Police
Officers and $30.77 per pay period for Community Service Officers.

Police Safety Equipment

The City shall furnish al! safety equipment required by the City, including
firearms, for the use of new full-time Police Officers. Such safety equipment and
any and all replacements furnished by the City shall remain the property of and
under the control of the City.

Police Educational Incentive Program

A.

Eligibility

The educational incentive program is open to all merit system employees of the San
Mateo Police Department classified as safety employees by the Public Employees!
Retirement System.

B.

Qualifications

1. Possession of a P.O.S.T. Intermediate Certificate shall qualify an
employee for three and one-half percent (3.5%) of his or her basic salary,
rounded to the nearest dollar, provided that no such payment shall exceed
three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the maximum salary for Police

40
 

 

34.4

Sergeant.

2. Possession of a P.O.S.T. Advanced Certificate shall qualify an employee
for seven percent (7%) of his or her basic salary, rounded to the nearest
dollar, provided that no such payment shall exceed seven percent (7%) of
the maximum salary for Police Sergeant.

3. Upon qualification an employee shall be entitled to educational incentive
pay from the first full pay period following the date of submittal and
acceptance, Educational incentive pay will be paid on a biweekly basis.

Defense of Police Officers
The City agrees to provide for the defense of a criminal/civil action or proceeding

brought against a safety employee or former safety employee of the Police Department as
it determines proper under California Government Code Section 995 et seq.

Article 35
Salaries

35.1

35.2

Compensation Locreases During the Term of this Agreement

Effective October 11, 2015, Police Officers will receive an across the board increase of
4.0%, plus a 4.0% equity adjustment, Community Service Officers will receive an across
the board increase of 4.0% plus 0.5% to aid in retention and Dispatchers will receive an
across the board increase of 4.0%, plus 1.0% in recognition it is a hard to recruit for
classification.

Effective July 31, 2016, Police Officers will receive an across the board increase of 3.0%,
plus 1.0% in recognition it is a hard to recruit for classification, Community Service
Officers will receive an across the board increase of 3.0% and Dispatchers will receive an
across the board increase of 3.0%, plus 1.0% in recognition it is a hard to recruit for
classification.

Effective July 30, 2017, Police Officers will receive an across the board increase of 3.0%,
plus 3.0% in recognition it is a hard to recruit for classification, Community Service
Officers will receive an across the board increase of 3.0%, plus 0.5% to aid in retention,
and Dispatchers will receive an across the board increase of 3.0%, plus 1.0% in
recognition it is a hard to recruit for classification.

Compensation Survey
Police Officer, Dispatcher and Community Service Officer benchmarks will be surveyed

in comparable cities (populations from 50,000 to 150,000) within San Mateo, Santa Clara
and Alameda counties. The next survey will be compiled no later than three (3) months

4
35.3

35.4

prior to the expiration of this Memorandum of Understanding. The City will notify the
Association of any change in survey methodology and will meet upon request.

Deferred Compensation — Police Officer:

Effective August 2, 2015, the City shall contribute two and nine tenths percent (2.9%) of
base salary for each Police Officer hired before January 1, 2013 to a Revenue Code
Section 401 (a) (h) deferred compensation plan program in lieu of a Post Retirement
Survivors’ Allowance program. Effective October 11, 2015, the City contribution shall be
two and one-half percent (2.5%) of base salary.

The City shall contract with a third-party administrator to establish and administer a
401 (a)(h) Plan that shall include the 401(h) component for funding of retirement medical
expenses. Any administrative fees associated with administering the plan shall be paid
by the City. The City has the authority to select the administrator, which may change
from time to time based on cost and service provided.

Retirement Health Savings Account

City Contribution

Effective August 2, 2015, the City will contribute one-half percent (0.5%) of base salary
per month for all classifications in the bargaining unit. Effective October 11, 2015, the
City contribution shall be two percent (2%) of base salary.

Separation Pays

At the time of service or disability retirement from City merit employment:
¢ For employees with fifteen (15) years or more of City merit service, at retirement
all eligible sick leave, vacation leave, compensatory time, holiday leave, and
annual leave shall be contributed pre-tax to the employee’s RHSA.

« For employees with less than fifteen (15) years of City merit service, at retirement
no accrued leaves shall be contributed to the employee’s RHSA.

At the time of non-retirement separation from City merit employment, no accrued leaves
will be contributed to the employee’s RHSA.

The Association may elect to change the above conversion of separation pay
arrangements for each successive calendar year of this Agreement. The Association must
notify the City’s Human Resources Department in writing no later than November 30" of
the change(s) to be made for the following calendar year. In the event notification is not
received by the deadline, the contributions and separation pay arrangements in effect at
the time will continue for the following calendar year.

42
 

35.5

Base Pay and Premium Pay Calculations

The annual hourly factor used to calculate the hourly rate for premium pay is 2,080
hours. Base salary shall be predicated on 2,080 hours. The hourly rate is used to
determine the following premium pay benefits:

Out-of-Class Pay Standby Alert
Overtime Pay Discretionary Leave Buy-Backs
Sick Leave Payouts Bilingual Differential

Article 36
Retirement

36.1

36.2

36.3

Retirement benefits shall be compensated for under applicable legislation pertaining to
the Public Employees' Retirement System.

Subject to the agreement of other affected employee organizations, the City will adopt
provisions allowing for employees to pay for prior military service credit on a pretax
basis utilizing the IRS 414(H)(2) provision.

The City currently provides the following retirement benefits:

Safety

3% @ 50 with single year highest compensation for “classic” members hired before
December 9, 2012.

3% @ 55 with highest average annual pensionable compensation earned during 36
consecutive months of service for “classic” members hired on or after December 9, 2012.
2.7% @ 57 with highest average annual pensionable compensation earned during 36
consecutive months of service for “new” members hired on or after January 1, 2013.

Miscellaneous

36.4

2% @ 55 with single highest year compensation for “classic’? members hired before
December 9, 2012.

2% @ 55 with highest average annual pensionable compensation earned during 36
consecutive months of service for “classic” members hired on or after December 9, 2012,
2% @ 62 with highest average annual pensionable compensation earned during 36
consecutive months of service for “new” members hired on or after January 1, 2013.

Retirement Contribution

Effective October 11, 2015, classic members shall pay 50% of the total normal cost rate,
with a cap of 14% for safety and 8% for miscellaneous, in accordance with Government
Code 7522.30. For the remainder of fiscal year 2015-2016, the amount paid by classic
safety members shall be 13.2% and the amount paid by classic miscellaneous members
shall be 7.2%. The contributions toward employer rate will be pre-tax under 414(h)2.

43
we

New members hired on or after January 1, 2013 shall pay 50% of the total normal cost
rate, in accordance with Government Code 7522.30. For the remainder of fiscal year
2015-2016, the amount paid by new safety members shall be 11.25% and the amount
paid by new miscellaneous members shall be 6.25%, The contributions toward employer
rate will be pre-tax under 414(h)2.

Article 37
Classification and Compensation Studies

37.1 An employee may request once every twenty-four (24) months, a re-evaluation of his/her

37.2

37.3

job based on significant changes in job content and classification description. The
request must contain justification. Following Department Head review, the request shall
be forwarded, within thirty (30) days, to the Human Resources Director. Any changes
determined will become effective the first pay period following the decision, or the job
will be returned to its previous status.

An appeal to the findings of a classification and compensation study must be submitted to
the Human Resources | Director in writing within ten (10) working days of an employee's
receipt of notification of the survey results. The employee must clearly state the reasons
for the appeal. Appeals do not include matters for which a prior appeal opportunity was
present. The Human Resources Director will submit the appeal and the recommendation
of the Human Resources Department to the Personnel Board, who will hear the appeal as
soon as practicable after receipt. ,

During the term of the Agreement, no Unit-wide classification and/or compensation
studies will be undertaken.

Article 38
Separability of Provisions

Tn the event that any provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding is declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be illegal or unenforceable, that provision of the Memorandum of
Understanding shall be null and void but such nullification shall not affect any other provision of
this Memorandum of Understanding, all of which other provisions shall remain in full force and

effect.

Article 39
City Rights

The rights of the City include, but are not limited to, the exclusive right to determine the mission
of its constituents’ departments, commissions and boards; set standards of service; determine the
procedures and standards of selection for employment and promotion; direct its employees; take

44
 

 

disciplinary action; relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other
legitimate reasons; maintain the efficiency of governmental operations; determine the methods,
means and personnel by which government operations are to be conducted; and exercise
complete control and discretion over its organization and the technology of performing its work.

Changes in scheduling and assignment of personnel are the right of the City, and nothing in the
establishment of a working schedule, or alternative schedules, indicates any vesting in the
schedule by employees. The Association acknowledges the City's right to change scheduling
practices and procedures as the City deems appropriate to the mission and concerns of
operations, The City will give appropriate advance notice of changes to scheduling to the
Association and upon request will meet and confer regarding the impact of such changes prior to
implementation of any change.

The parties agree that all subjects not specifically listed herein are retained by the City, and the
Association further agrees to waive its rights to grieve concerning the contemplation, approval,
application and implementation or adoption of any management rights whether hereto listed or
not. The City agrees that is has an obligation to meet and confer on the impacts of decisions
made within the scope of bargaining.

Article 40
No Strike

The Association, its members and representatives, agree that during the term of this agreement
they will not engage in, authorize, sanction, or support any strike, slowdown, stoppage of work,
curtailment of production, concerted refusal of overtime work, refusal to operate designated
equipment (provided such equipment is safe and sound) or to perform customary duties growing
out of any dispute relating to the terms of this agreement. Neither the Association nor any
representatives thereof shall engage in job action for the purpose of effecting changes in the
directives or decisions of management of the City, nor to effect a change of personnel or
operations of management or of employees not covered by the Memorandum of Understanding,
during the term of this agreement.

Article 41
Contracting Out

Prior to any final decision regarding the contracting out of bargaining unit work, which would

result in layoff, the City will provide prior notice to the Association and, upon request, meet and
confer on the impact of the layoff.

45
ma

Article 42
Reopener /Continued Discussion

The parties recognize that, at times during the lengthy term of this agreement, a party may wish
to discuss a matter covered by the agreement. It is agreed that the parties will meet and discuss,
although without any obligation to agree or modify agreement provisions, non-economic issues.
In addition, the parties agree to continue to discuss attraction and retention initiatives during the
term of the contract.

Article 43
Termination of Agreement

This Agreement shall terminate as of the close of business at midnight, August 11, 2018.
The existing and unmodified rules, regulations, resolutions, or ordinances relating to wages, °
hours and conditions of employment not covered in this Agreement for employees in this Unit

shall remain unchanged for said period unless such changes are the result of meeting and
conferring as required by law.

46

 
SIGNATURES

SAN MATEO POLICE OFFICERS ASSN. CITY OF SAN MATEO

ae

Stacey Cue

  
 

ie
Al ge CeO
‘fredd Safidoval Casey Echarte

ae FR Ah fe

Nickolas Morsilli

  

     
 

Randall Bickel Sonya Morrison

47
1
 

 

 

Benefit Summary Sheet: Police Unit 2015

The following list summarizes the various benefit programs in effect for members of the Police
Unit as of August, 2015:

Dental Insurance Fully City paid. 109/80/80 basic plan with a $15 annual deductible
and a $3,000 annual maximum payment. The lifetime orthodontic
benefit is 50% to a life-time maximum of $2,000. Refer to dental
brochure for specific benefits.

Vision Insurance Fully City paid vision coverage.

Employee Assistance Confidential counseling services;

Program City paid. Employees receive six (6) free visits per contract year.

Holiday 13 per year. See MOU for details.

Life Insurance $50,000 life coverage; $10,000 Accidental Death and
dismemberment. Fully City paid.

Mileage Allowance IRS rate per mile for Police Officers and Community Service
Officers.

Dedicated Health City Contribution $160.00 month.
Pool Money See MOU for pool changes and premium cost
sharing.

Retirement Program See MOU for pension tiers and payment of pension costs.

Sick Leave 12 days per year earned; unlimited accumulation; see MOU for

specifics re: use, extended sick leave, and family sick leave.

Social Security Paid equally by employee and City---7.65% for non-safety and
1.45% (Medicare) for newly hired Police Officers.

Uniform Allowance $34.81 biweekly for Police Officers and $27.11 biweekly for

CSO’s; effective July 30, 2017 $38.46 for Police Officers and
$30.77 for CSO’s.

48
POLICE UNIT MOU
2015 INDEX

A

Accunul!. of Vacation, Sick Leave, Holiday Credits.34
AD&D Insurance...
Americans With Disabilities Act
Annual Leave Program......

B

 

Base Pay and Premium Pay Calculations
Beneftt Summary Sheet.
Bereavement Leave
Bilingual Differential .

c

Cafeteria Plan ..
Canine Differential.
City Rights...
Classification and Compensation Studies:
CSO Differential ....
CSO / Dispatcher Shift Schedules
CSO / Dispatcher Break Between Shifts ..
Compensation Increases
Compensation Survey,.
Continuous Service Define
Contracting Out...
Court Appearance...

D

Daily Hour Value
Defense of Police Officers,
Deferred Compensation..
Dental Insurance.....
Detective Differential .
Disability Leave for Non-
Disciplinary Procedur:
Doctor's Certification
Duty Differentials.

£

 
  
 

 

  
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 

 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 

Emergency Overtime.
Extended Sick Leave

F

Family Care Leave . 9
Family Sick Leav

G
Grievance And Appeal Procedures ....
Al

Health Insurance.

 

 
 

 

 

49

 

 

Layoff Rights.
Leave Of Absence Without Pay ..
Life Insurance...
Long Term Disability (LTD)...

M

Mail Distribution
Mileage Allowance
Military Leave...

 

  
 

 
  
 

 

 
 

Overtime...
Overtime Payment/Compensatory Time

Pp

Patrol Officers’ Alternative Scheduling Plan.
Payroll Deduction.
Police Damage Reimbursement ..
Police Educational Incentive Progr
Police Safety Equipment .
Police Weight Room
Pool Money
Probationary Perio
Proportionate Vacation

R

Recall end Reinstatement
Recognition ..
Reemployment .
Reopener /Continued Discussion .......
Repair / Replacement of Damaged Items .
Retirement...
Retirement Health Savings Accow

8

Salaries ......
Salary Advancement Within Range .
Salary for POA Unit Classification:
Salary on Demotion......
Salary on Initial Appointment

 

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 

SSaSsecana

 

   
  
 

 

 
   

RLYRS

 
 

 

E
i
i

 

Salary on Military Leave
Salary on Transfer ....
Seniority for Layoff Purposes
Separability of Provisions
Severance Package......

Shift Differential
Sick Leave......
Sick Leave Accrual .
Special Holiday Schedule
Standby Pay... an

T

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

  

 

Termination of Agreement .
Termination Allowance...

 

 

wRRAG

 

Training Outside Regular Working Hours .

50

 

Uniform and Equipment Allowance...
y

Vacation ....
Vacation Accumulation
Vacation Allowance For Terminated Employees.
Vacation Allowance: Non-Safety .
Vacation Emergency ...
Vacation for Safety Employees.
Vacation Pay Advance
Vacation Payment....
Vacation Scheduling.
Vision Insurance...

 

 

 
  
  
 
 
  
 

   
