AGREEMENT

Between

CITY OF JERSEY CITY

-and -

JERSEY CITY POLICE OFFICERS BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

 

JANUARY 1, 2013 through DECEMBER 31, 2016

 

(00450580; i)
ARTICLE

wa

6.

(00450580; 1}

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
RECOGNITION
MAINTENANCE & MODIFICATION OF WORK RULES
ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVE & MEMBERS
RETENTION OF CIVIL RIGHTS
RETIREMENT

LEAVES OF ABSENCE

 

DUES DEDUCTION & REPRESENTA
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
NON-DISCRIMINATION

WORK DAY & WORK WEEK
VACATIONS

INJURY AND SICK LEAVE
INSURANCE, HEALTH & WELFARE
TUITION REIMBURSEMENT
EXCHANGE OF DAYS OFF
HOLIDAYS

COMPENSATORY TIME

OVERTIME

CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

TERMINAL LEAVE

33

35

36
40.

4]

42

fonasnsan iy

BERFAVEMENT LEAVI

MILITARY LEAVI

BULLETIN BOARDS

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
NON-CONTRACTUAL GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
ASSIGNMENTS & REPORTING TIME

POLICE EQUIPMENT

SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEE
QUALIFICATION OF EMPLOYMENT
COMMENDATIONS & HONORABLE MENTIONS

DEFECTIVE VEHICLES

 

SPECIAL TRAINING

SALARIES & LONGEVITY

TABLE OF ORGANIZATION

BLOOD DONOR

MISCELLANEOUS

CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATION & PROMOTION
POLICE OFFICER'S BILL OF RIGHTS

TIME OFF FOR BROTHER OFFICERS KILLED IN THE LINE
OF DUTY

SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS
EXTENSION OF CONTRACT AGREEMENT
DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE

DURATION OF AGREEMENT

58
59

60

67

68

69

71

69
PREAMBLI
THIS AGR

 

SEMENT, entered into this day of . 2013 by and

between the City of Jersey City, a Municipal Corporation of the State of New Jersey

(hereinafter called the * ‘iy’

 

and the Jersey City Police Officers Benevolent Association,

Inc. (hereinafter called the “POBA® or the “Association’

 

» fepresents the complete and final

understanding on bargainable issues between the City and the Association, and the City agrees

hot to enter into any other Agreement or contract with those of its employees who are hereby

covered which in any way conflicts with the terms and provisions of this Agreement

(00450580. 1}
   

{OGNITION

\ The City herebs Fecognizes the Association as the exclusive collective
negotiations agent for all Non-supervisory sworn Police Officers employed by the City

B The title “Police Officer” shall be defined to include the plural as well as the

singular, and to include males as well as females, and those Police Officers assigned to the

Investigative Division of the Police Department
Cc The title “Police Officer” shall be exclusively used on all Departmental and

City communications.

(00450580, 1)
 

MAINTENANCE & MODIFICATION OF WORK RULES

A All conditions of employment relating to wages, hours of work and general
working conditions contained in the rules and regulations of the Police Department,
ordinances or resolutions of the City pertaining to police employees, or directives from the
Office of the Police Chief or Director of Public Safety which are of universal application
within the Police Department. currently in effect, shall be maintained for the life of this
Agreement

B Proposed new rules or modifications of existing rules governing working

retion of management,

 

conditions, as set forth above, which are not exclusive within the dis
shall be negotiated with the majority representative prior to implementation

Cc The provisions of this Agreement will govern, where specifically applicable,
any inconsistent rules, regulations or ordinances or any other provisions or manual or law
notwithstanding. The City will cause to be drafted and put into effect all necessary ordinances

to make existing ordinances consistent with the Agreement.

(00450580, 1)
ARTICLE 3
ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVE & MEMBERS
A Accredited representatives of the Association, not to exceed three (3). shall be
permitted to visit Police Headquarters, substations, or the Office of the Police Director for the
purpose of observing working conditions ot assisting in the adjustment of grievances. When
the Association decides to have its representative enter the City’s facilities or premises as
outlined above, it will request such permission from the appropriate City representatives, and
such permission will not be unreasonably withheld, provided further that there shall be no

‘rence with the normal operations of the business of City government or the normal

 

Inter
duties of employees. Before entering the aforesaid premises, the authorized representative
shall notify the Unit Commander or, in his/her absence, his/her authorized representative

B. The President of the Association and his/her designees [not to exceed two (2)]

igned to special duty, utilizing flexible time arrangements on a staff schedule

 

shall be a
(otherwise referred to as “flex time”) in performing their assigned POBA duties and
functions, and except in emergencies shall be entitled to administer and enforce the
provisions of this Agreement. At the request of the Police Director, the POBA designees
shall supply the Police Director with the hours worked over a twenty-one (21) day work
cycle.

Cc. In the absence of the President, the first Vice-President of the Association
shall be assigned to special duty so that he/she may assume the duties of the President

D During the negotiations, authorized Association representatives, not to exceed

five (5), shall be excused from their normal work duties to participate in collective

hegotiation sessions that are mutually scheduled to take place during their scheduled work

(00450580; 1)
time. and shall suffer no loss of regular pay thereby

 

i The City agrees to grant time off to a maximum of thirteen | 13) employees
designated by the Association fo attend police conventions as provided by state statute,
provided seventy-two (72) hours written notice is given to the Chief of the Department by the
\ssociation. Said convention leave will include reasonable travel time

F Fwo (2) members of the \ssociation shall be granted the day off to attend state
Meetings and state legislative sessions, including legislative hearings

G. Elected officers and unit delegates, not to exceed twenty-five (25), shall be
granted time off to attend local meetings and caucuses, provided Divisional or Departmental
operations are not impeded by the granting of such requests

H ‘The current practices with Tespect to the operation of the Association office at
282 Cental Avenue, Jersey City, New Jersey, will be Maintained for the life of this
Agreement. However, if the City deems it necessary to sell or utilize said building for other
purposes, the Association shall be provided with comparable office space in another police
facility

I Police Officers granted time off pursuant to this Article will be required to

report to work and will be released for the duration of the function or meeting only.

(00450580; 1}
ARTICLE 4

 

RETENTION OF CIVIL RY Ss
ENE CINE. RIGHTS

Employees shall retain all civil rights under New Jersey State law and federal laws,

consistent with their authorities and responsibilities as Police Officers provided, however, this
provision shall not be deemed to limit or modify the civil rights of such employees as private
eltizens.

6
(00450580, 1)
ARTICLE §

RETIREMENT

Members who become eligible for retirement under New Jersey law and ordinance of

the City of Jersey City shall retain all pension rights, hospitalization insurance and other

benefits as currently provided

(00450580, 1) ,
ARTICLE 6

 

LEAVES OF ABSENCE

\ \ leave of absence without pay for up to six (6) months will be granted for
good cause to any member who has been employed for a period of one (1) day beyond the
Police Officer's probationary period, as defined by Civil Service. The leave may be extended
for up to an additional six (6) months Such leave shall not be arbitrarily withheld

B The Association will be notified immediately of the leave of absence of any of
the Police Officers within the bargaining unit, and of any extensions

C Police Officers on leave of absence shall not earn vacation time during such
cave. Police Officers’ annual vacation leave shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis.

D. The annual vacation leave, in accordance with Article 11, shall be reduced by
the pro-rated number of monthly vacation days for each month said Police Officer is on leave
of absence

E Police Officers on leave of absence shall not receive paid or compensatory
holidays during such leave. Police Officers’ holiday time shall be pro-rated on a monthly
basis for the fourteen (14) holidays granted in accordance with Article 16. The holiday time
shall be reduced to the same ratio of compensatory and paid days as stated in Article 16 by the

pro-rated number of monthly holidays (1.2 days per month) for each month the paid Police

Officer is on leave of absence.

(00450580, 1}
ARTICLE 7
DUES DEDUCTION & REPRESENTATION FEE
A The City agrees to deduct from the salaries of its Police Officers subject to

this Agreement dues for the Association. Such deduction shall be made in accordance with

SAL 52:14-15.9(e), as amended. Said monies.

 

Chapter 310, Public Laws of 1967,
together with the records of any corrections, will be transmitted to the Association office by

of each month following the monthly pay period in which the deductions were made

 

the
B If, during the life of this Agreement, there will be any change in the rate of
Police Officers’ dues, the Association will furnish to the City written notice thirty (30) days
prior to the effective date of such change.
C lhe Association will provide the necessary check-off authorization form and

ciation will

 

deliver the signed forms to the Police Department Finance Officer The As
indemnify, defend and save the City harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits or
other forms of liability that may arise out of or by reason of action taken by the City in
accordance with the instructions of the Association pursuant to this Article

D. Pursuant to Chapter 295 of the Laws of 1977, the City will not deduct dues
from the salaries of any Police Officers in the negotiating unit for an organization other than
the Association. Further, the City agrees to terminate all existing dues deductions from unit
Police Officers for organizations other than the Association on the July 1 following a request
to do so by the Association.

E Representation Fee.

1 Purpose of Fee. If a Police Officer does not become a member of the

Association during any membership year (i.e., from September | to the following August 31)

(00450580, 1)
which is covered in whole or in part by this Agreement, said Police Officer will be required to

  

pay a representation fee to the Association for that membership year, The purpose of this fee
x T ) I

 

will be to offset the Police Officer's Per capita cost of services rendered by the Association as

a majority representatiy e
F Amount of Fee.

yuification. Prior to. the beginning of each menibership year, the

  

Association will noufy the City in writing of the amount of the regular membership dues,

initiation fees and assessments charged by the Association to its own members for that

membership year, The Tepresentation fee to be paid by non-members will be equal to 85% of

that amount

faximum. In order to adequately offset the per capita cost of

ho

 

services rendered by the Association as majority representative, the representation fee should
be equal in amount to the regular membership dues, initiation fees and assessments charged
by the Association to its own members, and the representation fee has been set at 85% of that
amount solely because that is the maximum presently allowed by law. If the law is changed
in this regard, the amount of the representation fee automatically will be Increased to the
maximum allowed, said increase to become effective as of the beginning of the Association
membership year immediately following the effective date of the change.

ion of Fee,

 

G

lion. Once during each membership year covered in whole or

I

 

in part by this Agreement, the Association will submit to the City a list of those Police
Officers who have not become members of the Association for the then current membership

year. The City will deduct from the salaries of such Police Officers, in accordance with

10

(00450580: 1)
 

paragraph #2 below, the full amount of the representation fee and promptly will transmit the
amount as deducted to the Association

Payroll Deduction Schedule. The City will deduct the representation
fee in equal installments, as nearly as possible, from the paychecks paid to each Police Officer
on the aforesaid list during the remainder of the membership year in question, The deductions

will begin with the first paycheck paid

Ten (10) days afier the receipt of the aforesaid list by the City:

or
b Thirty (30) days after the Police Officer begins his/her

ning unit position, unless the Police Officer previously served in a

 

employment in a bar
bargaining unit position and continued in the employ of the City in a non-bargaining unit

first paycheck

 

position or was on layoff, in which event the deductions will begin with the f
paid ten (10) days after the resumption of the Police Officer's employment in a bargaining unit

position, whichever is later.

 

3 Termination of Employment, If a Police Officer who is required to pay

 

a representation fee terminates his/her employment with the City before the Association has
received the full amount of the representation fee to which it is entitled under this Article, the
City will deduct the unpaid portion of the fee from the last paycheck paid to said Police
Officer during the membership year in question.

4, Mechanics. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the mechanics

 

 

for the deduction of representation fees and the transmission of such fees to the Association

will, as nearly as possible, be the same as those used for the deduction and transmission of

regular membership dues to the Association

(00450580; 1}
  

ciation will notify the City in writing of any cl

 

in the list provided for in paragraph #1 above and/or the amount of the representation and

 

such chang

 

vill be reflected in any notice.

6 P

 

ationary Police Of

 

icers, On or about the last day of each month,

beginning with the month this Agreement becomes elective, the City will submit to the

Association a list of all probationary Police Officers who be

 

an their employment in a

bargaining unit position during the Preceding thirty (30) day period. The list will include

names, job titles and date of employment for all such probationary Police Officers

7. Indemnifi

 

n. The Association will indemnify, defend and save the

City harmles

 

against any and all claims, demand

 

Sulls or other forms of liability that may

arise Out of or by reason of ation taken by the City in accordance with the instructions of the

Association pursuant to this Article.

(00450580, 1}
 

ARTICLE

 

     

 

MANAC I
SAE MENT RIGHTS
\ The City hereby retains and Feserves unto itself, without limitation, all powers

rights, authority, duties and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it prior to the signing
of this Agreement by the laws and Constitution of New Jersey and of the United States

B The exerci

 

se of the foregoing Powers, rights, authorities, duties and
responsibilities of the City, the adoption of policies, rules, regulations and practices in
furtherance thereof, and the use of judgment and discretion in connection therewith shall be
limited only by the specific and express terms of this Agreement, and then only to the extent such
specitic and express terms hereof are in conformance with the Constitution and laws of New

Jersey and of the United States

(00450580, 1}
ARTICLE 9
NON-DISCRIMINATION

Neither the City nor the Association shall discriminate against any employee due to that

 

employee’s membership, non-membership, participation, lack of participation, or activities on

behalf of, or the employee's refraining from activity on behalf of, the Association

{00450580, I}
ARTICLE 10

 

 

 

WORK DAY & WORK W
\ I. The normal work day and work week shall be the fifleen (15) section
schedule for line employees working the steady day, evening, or midnight schedule. This

schedule shall consist of five (5) 8-hour tours of duty followed by three (3) days off, followed

by five (5) 8-hour tours of duty followed by two (2) days off after which the cycle repeats

itself,
2. The work schedule for staft personnel shall consist of a twenty-one (21)
section schedule, consisting of five (5) days on duty, followed by two (2) days off, followed

by five (S} days on duty with two (2) days off, followed by four (4) days on duty followed by

three (3) days off, after which the cycle repeats itself, The staff work day shall consist of 8-

hour days

3. The normal work week of employees not assigned to schedules set forth in

2. above will not exceed the annual work hours of the fifteen (15) section

 

Sections A.] and 4
schedule. Any such deviation shall be negotiated if required by law.

4. The fifteen (15) section schedule shall be the determining factor for the
hourly rate of pay for all members of the bargaining unit, including members working the
staff schedule. Additionally, there shall be one (1) compensatory time day awarded to all

members of the bargaining unit each year.

B There shall be annual bidding for steady shifts on a seniority basis. All such bids
shall be received no later than October 15". The new shift assignments shall be implemented no

later than forty-five (45) days thereafter. This shall not include light duty assignments and those

requiring special skills

(00450580; 1}
( \ecannual roster will be published in the month of March destunating the

assignment and status of each Police Officer

D MI Association officials on special assignments will not lose their permanent

 

assignment for their duration in office

(00450580; 1}
 

VACATIONS

in accordance with seniority at each

 

A \nnual vacations shall be granted stri
location

B Vacation periods shall begin January 1" and shall continue through the entire
year, subject to the conditions of this Article. Further, for all years of service other than an
employee's final year of service, vacation tme of each employee for the ensuing year becomes
vested on January 1“ During an employee's final year of service, vacation entitlement, rather
than being vested on the first day of said year, will be prorated so that the employee receives
fifty percent (50%) of the last year's entitlement if he/she retires on or before June 30" and the
entire year's vacation allotment if he/she retires on or after July 1

Cc The vacation period shall commence January I“ and continue until December 31°
of each year. The vacation allowances shall be as follows:

the vacation allowance

   

For all employees hired prior to February 17, 200
shall be as follows:

0-1 Year 1 working day per month through end of first calendar
year in which appointed

2-3 Years 15 working days
4-5 Years 20 working days

After 5 years 30 working days

 

2. For all employees hired on or after February 17, 2003, the vacation

allowance shall be as follows:

(00450580, 1)
O-1 Year Ida

 

sr month of employment
2-4 Years 15 working days per year

5-7 Years 17 working days per year
8-14 Years 22 working days per year
15-29 Years 23 working days per year

@ Pa qth ye Se
Start of 30" Year 25 working days per year

hall receive vacation

 

3 For_all employees hired after January _

  

Lworking day per month

15 working days

17 working days

 

30 working days

 

D Vacation time off requests shall be granted according to the vacation schedule
agreed upon between the City and the Association Vacation requests shall be submitted no later
than January 31° Notification of approval shall be granted no later than March I Bach
employee shall receive at least fifteen (15) working days vacation during the calendar period
May 20" through September 10" which shall be considered the "summer season." Each
employee shall be entitled to use ten (10) working days vacation time as time off during the
summer season at his/her request. Each employee shall defer the use of one (1) or more weeks

(5 working days) of his/her summer season vacation. The employees shall make written request

to defer such vacation time when the yearly vacation requests are submitted as specified in this

(00450580, 1}
 

Vacation time pursuit te

 

Article. The et

 

options f, 2, or 3 below
| Ihis option consists of exchanging summer season vacation for equivalent

cash payment. Fach employee may initially request to exchange for cash one (1) week (5

f vacation. The City agrees to fund this vacation buy-back option with at

 

least a dollar amount equal to the aggregate dollar amount of one (1) week's pay for each

 

member of this bargaining unit. In the event this option to exchange one (1) week for
cash is not utilized by all members, the number of weeks unused will be available for

members who may wish to exchange a second week of summer season vacation. If this

 

sul leaves weeks unused, any member may exche nge a third week of summer season
vacation for cash. In any event, if the number of weeks requested to be exchanged

exceeds the number of weeks available, seniority shall be the determining factor in which

hall be made no later

 

applicant receives the exchange. Payment for exchanged weeks
than June 15" for employees commencing summer season vacation prior to August |“
and no later than August 15"" for vacations commencing subsequent to August 1"

2. This option consists of exchanging one summer season week vacation (5
working days) for five (5) single use vacation days which are to be used at a time other
than during the summer season, and must be used within that calendar year and which
must be used at a time other than during the summer season or during the period
December 20" through January 3" ("holiday season")

3. This option consists of deferring the use of any or all summer season
vacation weeks to other than the summer season or holiday season. Any employee

exercising this option shall, in addition to receiving the re-scheduled vacation, receive an

19

(00450580, 1}
    

additional compensatory day for each

as are all other compensatary days

 

e either used or accumulatec

4 This option permits any employee to request the restoration of five (5)
deferred summer season vacation days (1 week) to be taken within the summer season
Such requests shall only be granted with the approval of the Chief of Police who, in
consideration of the staffing requirements and reduction in leave time sought of

shall not arbitrarily ot

 

approximately one (1) week per unit member in the age
unreasonably deny such requests

5 This option consists of an employee converting one (1) non-summer
season vacation week for five (5) single use vacation days to be used ata time outside the
summer season and must be used within that calendar year. Eligibility for this option
shall be that the employee must have exercised the option in Paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 above.
In no event shall an employee be entitled to more than five (5) single use vacation days in

a calendar year. unless hired on or afer February 17, 2003 which employees will be

entitled to up to seven (7) single use vacation days. Scheduling of single use vacation

 

ons of Article 17

  

days shall be treated as compensatory time and subject to the provi

herein

6 In addition to what has been set forth above, an employee may exchange
one (1) week of vacation for five (5) single use vacation days Eligibility for this option
shall be that the employee must have exercised the option in Paragraphs |, 2 or 3 above.
In no event shall an employee be entitled to more than five (5) single use vacation days in
a calendar year, unless hired on or after February 17, 2003 which employees will be

entitled to up to seven (7) single use vacation days. Scheduling of single use vacation

20

(00450580; 1}
days shall be treated as compensatory time and subject to the provisions of Article [7

herein

    

Jescribed in Dia)

Emplovees hired after 1/1/13 are not eligible for option

acation for five (5) or

 

2e May exchan

> an emplo

 

le whe

   

 

of his Artic

ory tiem and subject to

   

cation days

     

FE A vacation book shall be established to contain all unused vacation time

FP. Employees shall not be subject to recall on days off immediately prior to, or upon
return from, vacation unless all vacations are cancelled because of an emergency

G [Anemployee-shall-have-the rightto-acerue-unused-anmual-vacation- time with-ae

maximun-imitation-to-the extent perntitted by laws |

 

  

ximum

ss of reason

 

and without exception.

 

21

(00450580, 1}
ARTICLE 12
INJURY AND SICK LEAVE

\ Ifa Police Officer is incapacitated and unable to work because of an injury
sustained in the performance of his/her police duties, he/she will be entitled to injury leave with
full pay during the period in which he/she is unable to perform such duties, Such leave, not to
exceed one (1) year, will be determined by the Director of the Division of Medical Services and
the Director of Police. Such leave will not be arbitrarily or unreasonably withheld. In the event
the Police Officer receives worker's compensation with regard to said injury, such temporary
disability checks will be returned to the City for so long as the Police Officer remains on injury
leave

B Police Officers will be granted sick leave without loss of pay whenever they are

 

unable to work for reasons of health, up to one (1) year for each illness, pursuant to N.
40A:14-137. Such leave will be determined by the Director of the Division of Medical Services
and the Director of Police. Such leave will not be arbitrarily or unreasonably withheld

Cc All use of injury or sick leave pursuant to this Article shall be in accordance with
procedures established by General Orders of the Department

D The rights granted to Police Officers hereunder shall not preclude the right of the
City to take appropriate action to remove from the payroll Police Officers who are either on
special assignment or on paid leave afier no less than six (6) months from the original date of

injury or leave, provided the Police Officer is permanently disabled

mn”

i)
©

(00450580, 1)
bE \ny Police Officer

 

attenda

 

a pert & rece

   

during any calendar year

(January 1" throu

 

1 December

   

wall reeeive an additional two (2) terminal leave days

credited for each vear of pertect attendance and added to the Police Officer's bank. On-cuts

injuries will not deny any employee the additional two (2) terminal leave days

nN
Oo

(00450580, 1}
ARTICLE 13

   

TH & WELFARE
A The City shall provide and maintain insurance coverage as follows
I Commencing on the effective date of this Agreement, all new hires shall
be entitled to the Direct Access Blue Cross/Blue Shield Plan. or one of the HMO Plans

offered at the tine of the effective date of this Agreement at the employees choosing,
paid for by the City. All active employees shail be transferred to the currently offered
Direet Access Blue Cross/Blue Shield Plan, or one of the HMO plans offered at the time
of the effective date of this Agreement, at the employee's choosing, no later than July 1,
2010

2 The City reserves its right to change the carrier with whom it contracts to

 

provide these services for its employees. The level of benefits will be substantially
equivalent to those provided on the date immediately preceding the effective date of any
change
B The City will provide all employees with all necessary legal advice and counsel in
the defense of or in settlement of claims for personal injury, death, or property damage arising
out of or in the course of said employee's employment with the City, and the City will pay and
satisfy all judgments, except punitive damages, against the employees from such claims. ]
C. The City will continue to provide the currently effective dental benefit program,

both open and closed dental plans. The dental benefit Cap for the open plan is Two Thousand

Dollars ($2,000)

 

dD. [Effective duly, 2010, the City will pe ide-a-preseription-drug-planwith the

follewing-eo-pays-that-apply-en-a-p preseription-basis:|

 

{00450580; 1}
tion Co-Pay trom $20 $20

 

 

  
  
 
  
   

   

Sh 13
Vis
VAs
2.0 mail order (90 day supply in 2 times (2.0) the amount of a 30 day supply)
2 The following describes normal functions, such a

 

improvem.
coverage, unl

[MAIL ORDER ___|

Generic Drugs co-pay retail for) $4.50 mail order co pay per | |
i | prescriptions up to thirty (30) | thirty day supply prescription
days supply 'Fotal ninety (90) day mail

|
| order would amount to $4.50
fo | in co- pay. |

($20.00 co-pay — retail a /$13.00 mail order co- -pay Dp
prescriptions up to thirty (30) oy) thirty day supply prescription

days supply.

 

|
i
[Brad Drugs

| Total ninety (90) day mail
| order would amount to $39.00
Lin co-pay,

$50.00 mail order co- pay per

 

“Prescriptions | that cost over | $100.00 ‘co-pay on reta

  

$1,000. prescriptions up to thirty (30) | thirty day supply on each
days supply that cost over | prescription that costs over
$1,000.00 $1,000.00. Total ninety (90)

| day mail order would amount
_| to $150.00 in co-pay, _

It will be mandatory for all drugs that are defined as maintenance drugs by the United States
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be bought through mail order (when available).
However, the co-pay on the first two prescriptions filled on any maintenance drug, whether that
drug is over $1,000.00 in cost or not, will be at the retail co-pay rate for either a generic or brand
drug following which the employee will be responsible for the mail order co-pays set forth above

depending on the cost of the particular drug

(00450580. 1}
355.00 per

I Retirees shall have an annual maximum out-of-pocket Cap of $

person for prescription drug co-payments. Once a retiree or dependent has paid $1355.00 in co-

 

payments in a calendar year, that person is no longer required lo pay any preseription drug co-

um will automatically

  

payments for the remainder of that calendar year. The annual max

  

increase as the State Health Benefits Plan increases.
I The City will provide lite insurance in the amount of $10,000.00 and additional

accidental death and dismemberment insurance in the amount of $10,000.00 for each employee

,000.00 life insurance policy upon regular retirement,

 

The City will provide employees with a §

provided this is not in conflict with State law

G Effective [July4-2040] January 1, 2013, each member of the bargaining unit and

 

his or her dependents shall be reimbursed up to [$400.00] $125.00 per year, per family member,
for any optical related expenses consistent with the existing City of Jersey City optical plan. For

purposes of this payment, dependent children shall be covered only up to age twenty-three (23)

40A:14-137, as amended, are to be

 

H The benefits and protection of NuJ
afforded Police Officers as if set forth in full herein

I An employee using his/her own automobile (on order from the City) while on
duty shall suffer no monetary loss as a result of any accident which occurs while being on duty

J. Where the City directs an employee to use his/her automobile in the line of duty
on a continuous basis, the City shall pay the difference between “pleasure” rates and “business”
rates for such personal automobile

K. Smoke Inhalation. In any smoke inhalation case affecting an Officer within the

unit, such Officer shall be taken out of service and given a complete examination.

I In all cases where chest pains or exposure to hazardous materials are

{00450580. 1)
reported by an Officer, such Officer shall immediately he t

 

vut of service and
provided with a complete and thorough examination by the City

at Ils expense to assure

the health and safety of such Officer

 

L The City and the Association agree to the continued existence of an Employees”
Assistance Program. It is understood that the Employees’ Assistance Program will provide for a

maximum of two (2) entries into the program with a maximum duration of forty-five (45)

 

calendar days of in-patient care for each entry. All other details of the program will be as agreed

to by the Association and the City from time to time

27

(00450580, 1)
 

A lhe Association and the City mutually recognize the importance and advantage
of higher education. Therefore, it is agreed that the City shall provide funds in accordance with
the system set forth below to reimburse members of this bargaining unit for taking courses in an
approved college which are part of a degree granting program College courses for which
reimbursement will be permitted are limited to police science, public administration, public
safety, criminology, criminal justice, criminal law, law, sociology or a course directly related to
the performance of public duties ag a law enforcement officer

B For au employee to be eligible for tuition reimbursement under the provisions of
this Article, said employee must provide the Departinent with a notice of Intention to attend
college courses not later than September 1° of the calendar year in which the employee intends
to take courses for which reimbursement is sought

Cc Employees shall be entitled to reimbursement for tuition for courses taken in
accordance with this Article upon submission of evidence of successful completion arid the
qualification of the course as part of a degree granting program

D. There will be a POBA unit cap on cost of this program of $80,000.00, which will

be available to employees on the basis of seniority

28

(00450580; 1)
ARTICLE

 

CHANGE OF DAYS OFF

 

\ The Police Department may grant the request of any employee of this bargaining

 

unit to exchange or “swap” a tour of duty with another bargaining unit member, provided both

employees consent to said mutual swap,

ree to an emplovee’s swap of tours without

 

B The Police Department may

obtaining a replacement, provided the tour that is swapped is repaid at the City’s convenience

 

Cc Such requests shall be granted on a uniform basis, with standard rules and

aining unit making such requests

 

regulations applying to all employees of the bar
D Such requests which are made in conformity with the rules and regulations

established pursuant to Section C above shall not be unreasonably or arbitrarily denied

(00450580, I)
ARTICLE 16
HOLIDAYS
\ Each employee of this bargaining unit shall receive fourteen (14) holidays, ten
(10) of which shall be given as compensatory time and, effective January 1, 1999, four (4) of
which will be paid and included in the base salaries at each step of the salary guide as set forth in
Article 33. All holidays shall be credited to the employee on January 1“ of each year, except that
in an employee's final year of retirement, holidays will be pro-rated so that an employee who
retires on or before June 30" will receive filly percent (50%) of that year's allotment, and one
who retires on or after July 1° will receive the entire year's allotment
B In addition to the above referenced holidays, any day that is declared a holiday by
the Mayor or Council of the City shall be deemed a holiday, and all other sections of this Article
shall then pertain. Should the City declare an additional holiday for any other City employees,
the members herein shall receive the full amount of additional time off.
Cc All staff personnel shall, in addition to the number of holidays set forth in Section
A above, receive the following days as holidays and be entitled to the day off with no loss of pay

and, if not scheduled to work on that day, receive another day off:

New Year's Day July 4th
Good Friday Labor Day
Memorial Day Thanksgiving Day

Christmas Day

30

(00450580: 1}
 

ARTICLE

 

COMPENSATORY TIME

!

 

guidelines set f

 

 

fis understood that every effort will be made in accordance with t
below to provide Officers with the opportunity to utilize their unused compensatory. time
Therefore, the following guidelines for awarding compensatory time are adopted by the parties
! Requests for compensatory time off shall be made in writing by the

cluding at least one (1)

 

employee at least iree (3) calendar days before the date(s) requested, i
on-duty tour. The City shall be under no obligation to grant requests under less notice

Valid requests for time off shall not be arbitrarily or unreasonably denied
3 Compensatory time may be withheld during emergencies and when

manpower levels are abnormally low and there are insufficient manpower levels available

through the use of overtime lists

4 In the event that an employee's request for compensatory time is denied,
he/she shall be given first preference on his/her next request for such use.
5 Any unused compensatory time shall accumulate from year to year and

shall be granted to an employee upon his/her retirement

6. An accurate record will be maintained by each Unit Commander of all
compensatory time and unused vacation time due employees under his/her command. A book
designated as the Compensatory Time Book will be kept in each unit for this purpose. It shall be
verified annually by the employee and his/her Commanding Officer, and a copy containing the

initials of both the employee and his/her Commanding Officer verifying the accuracy of this

book will be given to the employee prior to January 30"

{004 50580: 1}
     

 

selon lo grant compensatory time owed to an employ

  

the normal rate of pay for the amount of compensatory time due.

8 Phe City shall permut Police Officers of the bargaining unit to buy bai

 

compensatory time which they have accumulated on a system to be jointly developed by the

Association and the City. The maximum annual obl

 

gation of the City under this system shall
be [$250.900 98} $300,000.00 Per year to the POBA, which is not cumulative

ies

 
ARTICLE 18
OVERTIME
A If an emplovee is required to work longer than his‘her eight (8) hour tour of duty.
he/she shall receive overtime at time and one-half rates
B If an employee is recalled to duty, he/she shall receive a minimum guarantee of

four (4) hours pay to be computed at time and one-half rates

 

Cc Ian employee of this bargaining unit is called to duty on his‘her day off, he/she

shall be paid for all hours worked and shall be guaranteed a minimum of four (4) hours at time
and one-half rates
dD. The City shall pay all employees for appearances in Municipal Court, County and

s, on their own time, the rate

 

Superior Court, Juvenile Court, Grand Jury and A.B.C proceeding
of time and one-half, with a four (4) hour minimum Employees shall submit in writing all time
spent in court to Unit Commanders. Employees may not be retained for the purpose of attaining
the minimum of four (4) hours if the appearance requires less time. This shall inelide motor
vehicle appearances.

E. In computing overtime, the first five (5) minutes of the first hour of overtime is
not compensable if that is the only time involved. If the employee works more than five (5)
minutes, overtime shall be computed from the first minute thereof. The employee is entitled to a
full hour pay at the overtime rate of time and one-half for the first hour. Thereafter, the
employee is entitled to a full hour pay when any fraction of an hour is worked. This shall not
apply if the employee is recalled for a full tour under Section B above, in which case, eight (8)

hours worked will result in 8 hours paid at the overtime rate.

Oo

(00450580, 1}
   

I Whenever an emplovee is recalled to duty, he!she d to a minimum
of four (4) hours of overtime at time and one-half

G To further facilitate fluctuating manpower (i.e. Christmas, vacations, ete.) a
separate and distinct list shall be used for the purposes of overtime

H ‘The overtime list discussed above shall be composed of volunteers They shall

be rotating and, if the Officer at the top of the list is available (that is, he/she is not on duty
when called), he’she shall report. or his‘her name shall revert to the bottom of the list
Additionally, when an Officer is called in and reports, his‘her name reverts to the bottom of the
list. If an Officer cannot report because he/she is already scheduled to work the same hours
then in that event he/she shall not lose his/her position on the list

|. If there are no volunteers or an insufficient number of volunteers, the City, in

s sole discretion, can mandate and assign an employee to overtime

 

I Overtime will be paid in the second pay period following the pay period in

which the overtime was worked

J. All Police Officers in the bargaining unit will receive their paycheck by 3:00

p.m. every other Thursday

K The City will endeavor to deliver special checks by 3:00 p.m. on the date

received in Police Headquarters.

 

L. The City will endeavor to provide a breakdown on all checks as to what is

included in the pay in said check (overtime, etc.)

(00450580, 1}
ARTICLE 19
CLOTHING ALLOW ANCE

vl be provide:

2010, all members of the bargaining unit shall be 5

 

A Fffective January |.

with a sum of One Thous ind Three Hundred Dollars (81,300.00) clothing allowance Phe sum

of $650.00 will be paid on the first regularly scheduled payroll day following the Council

 

meeting in January, and the additional $650.00 will be paid on the first regularly scheduled

payroll day following the regular Council meeting in July

be provided

 

B Efiective January |. 2012, all members of the bargaining unit shall

with a sum of One fhousand Three Hundred Fifty Dollars ($1350.00) clothing allowance Phe

sum of $675.00 will be paid on the first regularly scheduled payroll day following the ¢ ouncil

meeting in January, and the additional $675.00 will be paid on the first regularly scheduled

payroll day following the regular Council meeting in July

we
a

(00450580: 1}
ARTICLE 20

 

 

I MI Police Officers employed by the City prior to April 17) 1998 shall, upon
reurement, receive a mandatory cash payment in lieu of time off for the number of years of
service to the City based upon five (5) calendar days for each year of service. All Police Officers
hired on or after April 17, 1998 shall, upon retirement, receive a mandatory cash payment in lieu
of tine off for the number of years of service to the City based upon three (3) calendar days tor
each year of service. All Police Officers, upon retirement. will also receive a mandatory cash
payment in lieu of time off for any unused vacation time, to a maximum of the time to which the
Police Officer is entitled, and a mandatory cash payment for all unused compensatory time

2013 shall not receive an additional

   

Employees hired as police officers on or after January

will only receive a mandatory cash

   

cation time and compe ry time to am:

      
  

 

1 for his/her last year of employment.

1 The following formula will be used to calculate the terminal leave for
retirees

a The number of years of service is multiplied by either five (5) or
three (3) to obtain the number of calendar days based upon paragraph A above. Convert
calendar days to work days by dividing by fifteen (15) (reflecting the 15-section schedule) and
multiplying by ten (10) (reflecting days worked in the schedule). Add to this all unused
accumulated vacation days and unused accumulated compensatory days. The total number of

days is multiplied by the length of the work day (8.0 hours) and the hourly rate of pay for the

individual involved

36

(00450580, 1}
   

1 dies will be consider

 

 

ised shall receive the following

 

accumulated compensatory ine:

 

Terminal leave in accordance with this Article: and

3

AIL accumulated vacation time, including

 

full vacation allowance for the

year of death

(00450580, 1)
ARTICLE 21

BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
A In the event of a death in the Police Officer's immediate family, said Police
Officer will be

 

anted time off trom the day

 

death up to and including the day after the
funeral, but not to exceed five (5) calendar days

B

Immediate family. for purposes

‘

wf this Section, shall be defined as follows

 

parents, spouse, child, sister

brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparents, spouse’s

grandparents, grandchildren, siste!

  

in-law, brother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, or any

other relative residing in the immediate household of the Police Officer

One (1) day off will be granted to any Police Officer for attendance at the funeral

of an aunt, unele, niece, or nephew of the employee or his/her spouse. This day will be granted

 

for the day of the funeral service

D Reasonable verification of the event and familial relationship may be submitted

within five (5) days of the employee’s return to work.

38
(00450580. 1)
 

ARTICLE 22

MILITARY LE

 

\ The City hereby agrees to grant military leave to employees in accordance with

23-1, NLS.A, 38As1-4, and all applicable regulations or as otherwise provided for

 

under Federal and State law

B All members of the National Guard or Reserves will be granted time off with full
Such time off will be in addition to vacation, sick and

pay to attend required drills

administrative leave

Cc In the event an employee is called to active duty, the employee shall reecive the
difference in pay between his/her military pay and his/her regular pay for up to one hundred

eighty (180) days. ‘The City may, at its option, extend the one hundred eighty (180) day limit.

39

(00450580. 1)
ARTICLE 23
BULLETIN BOARDS

Ihe Association shall be provided with bulletin boards in each station or facility and

 

departmental headquarters for the posting of Association notices or other appropriate materials
Such bulletin boards shall be identified with the name of the Association, and the Association
may designate persons responsible therefore its maintenance, A copy of all such notices or other
materials shall at the time of its posting be sent to the Director of Police or his/her designee, and

he/she shall retain the right to have such notices or other materials which are detrimental to the

good order of the Department removed.

40

(00450580, 1}
 

ARTICLE
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

\ Purpose

, at the lowest possible level, an

 

! The purpose of this procedure is to secu
equitable solution to the problems which may arise affecting the terms and conditions of this
\greement and to resolve grievances as soon as possible so as to assure efficiency and promote

Police Officers’ morale. The parties agree that this procedure will be kept as informal as may be

appropriate

2 Nothing contained herein will be construed as limiting the right of any
Police Officer having a grievance to discuss the matter informally with the Director or Chief of
the Department and having the grievance adjusted, provided the Association is present and the

settlement does not violate the contract

B Definition. The term "grievance," as used herein, means any controversy arising
aan SS SeenON EER

over the interpretation or adherence to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and may be
a Nn nn

raised by any Police Officer or the Association
a? a So

Cc Steps of the Grievance Procedure. The following constitutes the sole and

ae

 

 

exclusive method for resolving grievances between the parties covered by this Agreement and
Sea eee oe eee eee ene Parnes | y 8 om

will be followed in its entirety unless any step is waived by mutual consent

nnn enn
Step One.

 

1 A grievant will institute action under the provisions hereof by submitting a
written grievance to his or her immediate supervisor within thirty (30) days after the grievant
became aware. or should have become aware, through diligent inquiry, but in no event more than

sixty (60) days after the occurrence of the event being grieved, and an earnest effort will be made

4]

(00450580, 1}
nedlate supervisor for the

 

to settle the difference hetween the ferteved and the tr

 

 

resolving the matter informally. Failure to act within the period set forth above will be deemed to
constitute an abandonment of the grievance

2 The immediate supervisor will render a decision in writing within five (3)
days afier receipt of the grievance

Step Two

I In the event the grievance is not settled through Step One, it may be filed
with the Division Commander within five (5) days following the determination by the inimediate
supervisor

2 The Division Commander or his/her designee will render a decision in

writing within five (5) days from receipt of the grievance

Step Thr

 

| In the event the grievance has not been resolved through Step Two, then

 

within five (5) days of receipt of the determination of the Division Commander or his/her
designee, the matter may be submitted to the Chief of the Department or the Director

2 The Chief and/or Director will submit a written answer within ten (10)
days from receipt of the grievance

Step Four.

I If the event the grievance is not settled through Steps One, Two and
‘Three, either party may refer the matter to the Public Employment Relations Commission within

ten (10) days after the determination by the Director or Chief. An arbitrator will be selected

pursuant to the rules of the Public Employment Relations Commission

(00450580, 1)
However, no arbitration hearing will be scheduled sooner than thirty (30)

days after the aggrieved elects to pursue his/her Civil Service remedies. The arbitration hearing
will be cancelled and the matter withdrawn from arbitration, and the Association will pay all
costs incurred by the City as a result of such improper submission

3 The arbitrator so selected shall confer with the representatives and hold a
hearing promptly and shall issue hissher decision no later than thirty (30) days from the date of

. then from the date the final

 

the close of the hearing, or if oral hearing has been waiy
statements and proofs on the issues are submitted to him

4 The arbitrator's decision shall be in writing and shall set forth his/her
findings of fact, reasoning and conclusions on the issues submitted. The arbitrator shall be
without power or authority to make any decision which requires the commission of an act

prohibited by law or which is violative of or adds to the terms of this Agreement. He/she shall

  

be bound by the provisions of this Agreement and restricted to the application of the fi
presented to him involving the grievance and render a decision in accordance with the weight of
the evidence. The decision of the arbitrator shall be submitted to the City and the Association
and shall be fina! and binding on both parties.
5 The cost for the services of the arbitrator, including per diem expenses, if
any, and actual and necessary travel, subsistence expenses, and the cost of the hearing room
shall be borne equally by the City and the Association. Any other expenses incurred shall be
paid by the party incurring them

6 Nothing herein will prevent any Police Officer from processing his/her
own grievance, provided that the Association may be present at such hearings, and further

idual Police Officer shall violate this Agreement

 

provided that no settlement with any such indi

cn

(00450580: 1}
charges ata

 

an emp

 

the penalty imposed reasonable.”

 

iy arbitrable issue

departmer

  

 

only to disciplinary action which is not reviewable to ¢ ivil Service

 

This paragraph shall a
only ia final legal determination results in a decision that such Matters are arbitrable

§ No Police Officer shall be discharged, disciplined, reprimanded, reduced

in rank, Compensation, position, or deprived of any employment advantage or given an adverse

evaluation of his/her service without just cause \ny such action asserted by the City or any

agent or representative thereof shall be subject to the grievance procedure set forth herein,

 

 

including binding arbitration. The grievant shall elect arbitration or pursuit of Civil Service

 

remedies, but not both. This pare raph shall apply only to disciplinary action which is not

 

reviewable to Civil Service only if a final legal determination results in a decision that such

matters are arbitrable

44

(00450580, 1}
 

ARTICL
NON-CONTRACTUAL GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
A Purpose

| The purpose of this procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible level, an

 

equitable solution to the problems which may arise affecting the terms and conditions of this

 

Agreement and to resolve grievances as soon as possible so as to assure efficiency and promote

Police Officers’ morale. The parties agree that this procedure will be kept as informal as may be

 

appropriate

2 Nothing contained herein will be construed as limiting the right of any
Police Officer having a grievance to discuss the matter informally with the Director or Chief of
the Department and having the grievance adjusted provided the Association ts present and the
settlement does not violate the contract

B Definition. The term “grievance,” as used herein, means any controy ersy arising
over the interpretation or adherence to, or the application of, the City's policies or administrative

decisions to any non-contractual terms and conditions of employment of employees covered by

this Agreement.

 

Cc Steps of the Grievance Procedt

 

Step One

I. An aggrieved Police Officer will institute action under the provisions
hereof within thirty (30) days after the grievant became aware, or should have become aware,
through diligent inquiry, but in no event more than sixty (60) days after the occurrence of the
grievance, and an earnest effort will be made to settle the difference between the aggrieved

Police Officer and his/her immediate supervisor for the purpose of resolving the matter

45

(00450580. 1}
informally. Failure to act within the periods set forth above will be deemed to constitute an

 

abandonment of the vrievance

2 The immediate supervisor will render a decision in writing within five (5)
days after receipt of the grievance

Step Two.

| In the event the grievance is not settled through Step One, it may be filed
with the Division Commander within five (5) days following the determination by the immediate
supervisor

2 The Division Commander or his/her designee will render a decision in

  

writing within five (5) days from receipt of the grievance

Step Three.

1 In the event the grievance has not been resolved through Step Two, then
within five (5) days of receipt of the determination of the Division Commander or his/her
designee, the matter may be submitted to the Chief of the Department or the Director.

2. Any such grievance shall be submitted within five (5) days to a
committee, consisting of one (1) representative of the Association and one (1) representative of
management, who will review the grievance and submit a written recommendation to the
Director within five (5) days

3 The Director will submit a written answer within ten (10) business days

from receipt of the recommendation. The decision of the Director shall be final with respect to

all non-contractual grievances

46

(00450580; 1}
 

 

ASSIGNMENTS & REPORTING TIME

Whenever assignments and reporting time are changed, Police Officers

 

shall be notified

at least seventy-two (72) hours ahead of time, whenever it is possible to do so.

00450580: 1}
ARTICLE 27
POLICE EQUIPMENT
A Yo the extent permitted by fiscal consideration, the City agrees to provide the

following equipment to its Police Officers.

 

ch Police Officer shall be equipped with a walkie-talkie radio when

assigned or detailed to foot patrol, if sufficient radios are av ailable

 

2 The City agrees to make optional, as part of police equipment, the carrying

ofa 9mm automatic hand gun, in accordance with qualifying standards within the Department
3 Future radio car purchases shall be made of patrol cars equipped with rain

within the limits of the budgetary

 

gutters (if available), air conditioning and power steering.

hall be assigned to the Patrol Foree,)

  

requirements of the Department. (These radio cars

4 Uhe City shall install a safety divider in patrol cars to protect Police

Officers from prisoners

48

{00450580, 1}
RETICLE 28

 

SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEE

\ The Association hereby degrees to create a Satety and Heath Committee of its
members

B The City hereby agrees to designate administrative personnel of the Department
of Public Safety to meet periodically with the Safety and Health Committee of the Association
Vhese meetings shall take place as jointly scheduled by the Safety and Health Conimittee of the
Association and the designee of the City

Cc The purpose of the Jomt committee shall be to generate proposals and

estions for the maintenance of high safety and health standards for the operation of the

 

Department

49

{00450580, 1)
ARTICLE 29

  

QUAL TION OF EMPLOYMENT
A All minimum standards presently in effect {or appointment to the position of
Police Officer shall be maintained

B There shall be no discrimination in the employment of Police Officers based upon

race, color, sex, creed, or national origin. All examinations fora position of Police Officer in the

City shall be standard, provided, however, nothing herein contained shall be construed as a
limitation upon the right of the ¢ ‘ity to extend preference to residents of the City in the making of
provided such preference is in accordance with State

appointments to the Police Department,

Jaw

(00450580. 1)
ARTICLE 30

COMMENDATIONS & HONORABLE MENTIONS

\ [tis the desire of the City to award ina tangible way those of its employees who
perform their duties in an exemplary fashion

B Any Police Officer earning the award of Medal of Honor or Honorable Mention
Valor Award shall receive two (2) days of compensatory time

Cc Any Police Officer receiving the award of Combat Cross shall receive two (2)
days of compensatory time

D Any Police Officer receiving the award of Commendation shall receive one (1)
compensatory day

E. Any Police Officer accumulating five (5) Excellent Police Service Awards shall
receive one (1) compensatory day

FP The President of the Association shall designate one (1} member of. the
Departmental Awards Committee

G. Each January, the Police Director or his/her designee and the President of the
Association or his/her designee shall choose one (1) Police Officer to receive an award based
upon outstanding service to the community and/or the Department during the preceding year.

The recipient shall receive two (2) days of compensatory time

(00450580; 1}
 

DEFECTIVE VEHIC LES
LE VENICE

A It shall be the responsibility of each Police Offteer to Inunediately report any

defective vehicles to his or her immediate superior

B In the event appropriate City authorities determine that a vehicle is in an unsafe
condition, said vehicle shall b

pe removed trom service and repaired

(00450580. 1}
ARTICLE 32

SPECIAL TRAINING

   

 

A Any special training shall be scheduled during regular working hours at no cost
to members for all meinbers of the Association affected by this Agreement
B. When, for any reason, special training is not held during regularly scheduled

working hours, then in that event. the time and one-half overtime provisions shall apply. This
Section shall not be applicable to around-the-clock situations, such as attendance at the Sea Girt
Academy

Cc The City shall make every attempt to upgrade the knowledge of employees in all
phases of police work. The City shall schedule in-service training on a regular basis so that

these Officers will keep abreast of all changes in the techniques and policies of the Department.

(00450580; 1}
ARTICLE 33

 

SALARIES & LONGEVITY
SALARIES & LONGEVITY

\ Salaries shall be increased as follows for officers hired prior to January 1, 2013

   
 
   
  
 
 
 
   

I Effective July 1. 201

the salar

ary guide, including Dete

 

> on each

ary chart below

 

3. y Charts are included at the end of this Al icle (Article 33)
6 Detective: Any police officer hired after Janu » 2013 and appointed to

    

e position of detective will r eive an additional $3,900 added to their base salar y for as long as

   

he maintains the appointment. In their LL" year asa member of the POBA these employees

 

will receive the base salary of a senior detective in lieu of this stipend.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

fo ~ 444/08- THA409— 1/4 40- AAA —HIA2
Poyear 40,894 42,046—— 43.47) 44:358 45.579
2" year 0,489 5487753304 54,770, 246
aid year 8.074 9.674 134 2,998 64,734.
qh year 1 63,054 64,788 66,570 68,404
3! year 5768-—67,57. 9435 ——__ 71.344 93 306
6" yea - 75,423 FEAT. 9.628 $4848
 year— $4,583 86,909 g0299 gy 955
Deteeti 8,854 885245 — 90.644 9313495695]

7 The City reserves the right to raise entry level salaries

8 These salary guides include holiday pay as set forth in Article 16.A for four

54

(00450580, 1)
SES" of the [998 daily 5

 

9 Members of this bargaining unit who use their vehicles on a full-time basis

 

ed upon the current

 

ucle

 

or partial basts shall receive a Shipend for the use of their

mileage reimbursement rate establislied by the Internal Revenue Service

 

 

10. Officers sworn-in on or after November | of any calendar year will
remain at the same salary Step on the upcoming January [°. These officers will move up
In salary step the following January 1

alendar year will remain

 

tl Oltficers sworn in on or after November a of any

 

These officers will move up in salary

 

at the same salary step on the up co ung January |

 

 

Step the following January 1°"

sragreement has not been negotiated brior to Dece

 

In the even thata s

 

ucces:

  

  
  

   

ast practices and prior agreem ! officers who are not 4

 

ath nth
maximum step (7" or 10" de

cont ry guide.

 

B -ongevily. Police Officers hired prior to January 1, 2013, will receive an annual

longevity payment in accordance with the following schedule:

Beginning 1“ % of Through Last
Day of Year Base Pay Day of Year
4 2 7
8 4 Hl
12 6 15
16 8 19
20 10 22
23 12 24
25 4 27

28 16 each thereafter

 

(00450580. 1)
1, 2013, will receive an annual longevity

 

‘ Through Last

   

Day of Year

2
4
6

IS te 1

 

 

Ins

 

thereatfie

A Police Officer who is hired up to October 31" of any year will be given full credit for
the year of service retroactive to January 1* of that year. Anyone hired thereafter will receive no
credit for that year, but will receive credit on January 1“ followi ng the first anniversary of the date

of hire

(00450580; 1}
Poltee Officers Hired After Ja

Officers

 

2012
$45,578
$56,276
$64,731
$68,401
$73,306
$81,818
$91,755

$95,695

{00450580, 1}

 

4 Guides

 

STEPS

NOUS WH

Det

$61,000
$69,000
000
$80,000
384,000
$88,000
$94,049

 

 

2.500%
Jul-13

$46,717
$57,683
$66,349
$70,111
$75,139
$83,863
$94,049

$98,087

    

 

$84,000
000
$96,212

 

2.300%
1/1/2014
$47,792
$59,010
$67,875
$71,724
$76,867
$85,792
$96,212

$100,343

 

$61,000
$69,000
375,000
$80,000
$84,000

 

2.250%
1/1/2015
$48,867
$60,337
$69,403
$73,337
$78,596
$87,723
$98,377

$102,601

2016

 

53,000
$61,000
$69,000
$75,000
$80,000
$84,000
$88,000

$100,295

 

1.950%
1/1/2016
$49,820
$61,514
$70,756
$74,767
$80,129
$89,433
$100,295

$104,602
ARTICLE 34

 

TH

 

TABLE OF ORGANIZ
RRR UE ORG

 

lately upon implementation of this Agreement, a commit

  

ets to he formed,
to be known as the Table of Organization Committee, and shall be composed of four (4)

members: two (2) from the City and two (2) from the Association

B Such Committee shall

choose its own chairman and formulate its own rules

Cc The purpose of the Committee shall be to provide Association input into any

development of a table of organization for the Department

(00450580. 1}
ARTICLE 35

BLOOD DONOR

\ Police Officers who donate blood with prior approval of the Department shall be

afforded two (2) Fecuperative tours on special assignment immediately following their donation if

said tours are on scheduled work ume. Every effort will be made. however, to ensure that

donations are made at the end of the employee's tour. This will not apply to employees donating

blood to a Departmental Blood Bank
B the City will provide space for the

annual blood drive. This is if space is

available, and such grant will be based upon approval, which will not be unreasonably withheld

59

(00450580. 1)
ARTICLE 36

MISCELLANEOUS
SEQLELLANEOUS

A The City agrees to assign two (2) employees to radio cars for the evening and

midnight tours, except in an eme

 

zeney. |

 

Juring patrol, at the direction of the Commander, one of

the Officers may be as:

 

gned to foot patrol within the sector patrolled by the vehicle. In the event

of any call to either employee, he or she shall rejoin his or her partner before responding

B Mental patients shall be transported in an ambulance

This Agreement represents and incorporates the complete and final understanding

and settlement by the parties on all bargainable issues which were or could have been the subject
Of negotiations. During the term of this Agreement, neithe: party will be required to negotiate

with respect to any such matter, whether or not within the knowledge or contemplation of either
or both of the parties at the time they negotiated or signed this Agreement

D. Annual uniform inspections shall be carried out at roll call

An employee, or his/her representative, shall have the right to inspect any of the

employee's files maintained by the City.

F The City and the Association will equally share the expense for printing one

thousand (1,000) copies of this Agreement for distribution to all members of the Association and
City administration. The City will receive one hundred (100) copies upon payment of bill

G The City w

ill endeavor to provide, at its expense, parking facilities for police
personnel while on duty wherever possible

H The City will permit pay phones to be installed in the police locker rooms in all
buildings where Police Officers are employed, for the exclusive use of the Police Officers, at no

expense to the City

60
{00450580 1)
The Association and the ¢

 

funds for the betterment of the Depart

tment

 

ate and federal monies received by the City for

use in the police service shall be report

 

> the Association

J \ retired Police Officer shall receive his/her laminated Police Department iD

card with the word “retired” entered on same

6]

(00450580. 1)
ARTICLE 37
CIVIL SERVICE CLASSIFICATION & PROMOTION

\ Promotional examin:

 

ions for the next h

 

rest rank above Police Officer wil

requested to the Civil Service Commission every two (2) vears

B \ promotional list to the next highest rank will be maintained at all times

Cc The City agrees that in the event of a recommended change in the classification of

a position in the Jersey City Police Department, it will notify the Association fifteen (15) days

prior to its submission of the recommended change to the Civil Service Commission

(00450580; 1}
ARTICLE 38
POLICE OFFICER'S BILL OF RIGH rs
EES BIEL OF RIGHT
A Members of the Force hold a tinique status as Police Officers, in that the nature of
their office and employment involves the exercise of a portion of the police powers of the
municipality
B The wide-ranging powers and duties given to the Department and its members
involve them in al! manner of contacts and relationships with the public. Out of these contacts
may come questions concerning the actions of the members of the Force. These questions may
require investigations by Superior Officers. In an effort to insure that these investigations are

conducted in a manner whieh js conducive to good order and discipline, the following rules are

hereby adopted

| The interrogation of a member of the Foree shall be at ar easonable hour,
in light of all circumstances involy ed, preferably when the member of the Force is on duty
2 The member shall be informed of the nature of the investigation before
any interrogation commences. If the informant or complainant is anonymous, then the Officer
shall be so advised. Sufficient information to reasonably apprise the member of the allegations
will be provided. If it is known that the member of the Force is being interrogated as a witness
only, he/she will be informed at the initial contact

3 The questioning shall be reasonable in length. Reasonable respites shall
be allowed. Time shall also be provided for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls and rest
periods as are reasonably necessary

The interrogation of the member shall not be recorded

 

Pursuant to the negouations between the City and the POBA over the terms of this 2009-2012

(00450580; 1)
 

cement, imn

 

Hately upon execution of the

 

cemen

 

the New Jersey Attorney General for a determination as to t

 

lity of this Section BEd). Phe
Attorney General's determination shall govern whether this Section [(4) remains in the

A

 

 

Feement or ts removed in its entirety

The member of the Force shall not be

 

subjected to any offensive

 

nor shall he/she be threatened with transter: dismissal or other disciplinary

pumshment. No promise of reward shall be made as an inducement to ans ering questions

Nothing herein shall. be construed to prevent the Investigating offic

 

from informing the

member of the possible consequences of his/her acts

6 Ifa member of the Force is under arrest or likely to be (that is, if he/she is

suspect or the target of a criminal inv estigation}, he/she shall be given hisher rights pursuant

to the current decisions of the United States Supreme Court

7 If a member, as a result of an investigation, is being charged with a
violation of the Rules and Regulations or is about to be so charged, he/she shall be afforded an

Opportunity to consult with counsel or Association representatives before any further

interrogation,

Cc An employee may see his/her personnel file upon request. Ifan employee wishes

to answer or supplement any material found in his/her personnel file, he/she may do so, and

his/her written statement shall become part of the personnel file. An employee or his/her

representative shall have the right to inspe

 

any of that employee's files maintained by the City
D An employee's home telephone number and address shall not be disclosed to any

person who is not a member of the Jersey City Police Department

E Disciplinary charges must be brought within thirty (30) days from the date of the

64
(00450580, 1}
 

igatton results in

    

of such infraction, unless a continuing ins

ges which extend the said pertod. In such case, char must be filed fifteen (15) days after

     

 

the close of the favesugation. Failure to charge within the period set forth above shall act a
bar to the bringing of charges

I No Police Officer will be subjected in dmestioning to the use of any polygraph

 

machines, psychological stress evaluators or sinilar lie-detector devices in Internal investigations
Upon request, a Police Officer will have the right to be accompanied by counsel or any other
person of the Police Officer's choosing during the entire interrogation of the Police Officer by the

City. Any Police Officer who has been found innocent of charges, whether departmental or

 

resulting from the civilian complaint, will have such record ol disciplinary action expunged from

hisyher Police Department personnel records

(00450580, 1}
TIME OFF FOR FELLOW OFFICERS KILLED IN THE LINE OF DUTY

A Time off will b

 

anted to four (4) Police Officers to attend the funeral service of

a Police Officer killed in the line of duty within the State of New Jersey

B \ marked car will be granted to the Association to be used for said services, at the

discretion of the Director of Police

Cc Time off will be granted to one (1) Police Officer to attend the funeral service fora

 

Police Off Killed in the line of duty outside the State of New Jersey

66

400450580, 1}
ARTICLE 40

 

   

  

SEPARABIL ) SAVING
SALE AND SAVING:

  

If any provision of this \greement, or any application of this

 

cement to any Police

Officer or group of Police Officers, is held to

 

be mnvalid by operation of law o1 by Court Order or

other tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such Provision will be inoperative. but all other

Provisions will not be affected thereby and will continue in full force and effect, In the event a
Provision of this contract is deemed to be invalid, then and in that event, the parties agree to meet

within fifieen (15) working days to Negotiate a provision to replace the one provision declare

 

invalid

(00450580, 1)
ARTICLE 41

 

EXTENSION OF CONTRACT AGREEMENT
RR UUNTRRACT AGREEMENT

ieorporates the complete and final understanding and

 

This agreement represents and
settlement by the parties of all negotiated terms and conditions of employment covering this
ad the opportunity to present and

bargaining unit. The parties acknowledge that they have h

discuss proposals on any subject, which is or may be subject to collective negotiations and the

applicability of the PERC Act

 

‘ement shall not be changed, supplemented or altered

 

The provisions of this Ag
except by an amendment in writing executed by both parties who are legally authorized to

gouiate amendments to this Agreement

 

68

(00450580, 1}
 

ARTICLE 42

 

   

 

DISCHAR AND DISCIPLINE
\ No Police Officer will be disciplined or discharged except for just cause. The
question of just cause will specifically be subject to the grievance procedure of this Agreement

ction which is not appealable to the Civil Service

 

Vhis paragraph shall apply to a disciplinary

Commission

B No Police Officer will be disciplined or called toa meeting that would result in
discipline without an Association representative present

Cc. Disciplinary action, with the exception of verbal warnings, are to be presented on a
“Disciplinary Action Form,” with a copy made available to the Police Officer

D The City will notify the Association in writing of any discharge or suspension

within three (3) days (excluding weekends and holidays) after the Police Officer is discharged or

suspended

E No hearing will take place without the Association being first notified, and the
Police Officer must be given sufficient time to receive counsel, no less than five (5) days,

excluding weekends and holidays

F. There will be two (2) types of hearings:
1 Formal
2 Informal
G Formal Hearings. A formal hearing will be held before a tribunal of two (2) Police

ssociation representative. There will be a transcript, taped or written, of

 

Superiors and one (1)

all proceedings. A recommendation as to guilt will be rendered within a reasonable time

I The panel may also recommend to the Director of Police a suitable

69

(00450580, 1)
   

guilty finding

The Director of Police will have the final discretion as tc

 

Itand pen

 

 

sndered within thirty (30) days of the close of trial
the Director may supplement the proceedings in his/her discretion

H Informal Hearing. An informal hearing will be conducted by the Director of

 

Police or his‘her designee with the Police Officer and an Association representative present

Chere will be no written or taped record of the proceedings. The Police Officer retains the right

 

to appeal as to the extent of the sentence of Civil Service, if applicable, or an arbitrator, but not

 

both. This paragraph shall apply to a disciplinary action which is not reviewable to Civil Service
only ifa final legal determination results ia decision that such matters are arbitrable
| Written Reprimands. A written reprimand must be served upon the Police Officer
within five (5) days of the occurrence for which the reprimand is being given
I lhe Police Officer will retain the right to appeal a written reprimand to the
Director of Police

2 In all cases, a Police Officer will be allowed to respond in writing for the

record

J Oral Reprimand. An oral reprimand will be just what it implies. There will be no

written record

(00450580, 1)
ARTICLE 43

DURATION OF AGREEMENT

 
  

Septem!

Any provision of this Agreement may be changed. supplemented or altered, provided both

 

is

 

—~ / S aU
a MOE - ~M \

JERRAMIAL DE. TRALY, JOHN KELLY, \

MAY wR Vy NOE IERSEY CIry BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR
ao) M

   

JERSEY CITY POLICE OFFICERS
BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION

  

/

CARMINE DISBROW
PRESIDENT, JERSEY CITY POBA

 

ATTEST:

 

(00450580, 1}
