FIRST SIDE LETTER AMENDMENT TO THE
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA ANA AND
THE SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
FOR FISCAL YEARS 2004-08

Effective upon the signing of this Side Letter, the City of Santa Ana (City) and the Santa Ana
Police Officers Association (SAPOA) agree that they have met and conferred and agree to
amend Article III, of the Memorandum of Understanding between the City and SAPOA for
Fiscal Years 2004-08. This Side Letter Agreement is based on the parties’ acknowledgement that
the Police Department’s need to hire sworn police officers has impacted the ability to fill or
increase needed non-sworn full time positions.

This amendment provides for the terms and conditions of employment for those to be employed
on a part-time basis to fill the position of Background Investigator with the understanding that
the salary for said position will be set in accordance with the Basic Salary and Wage Schedule.
There will be no more than four (4) Background Investigators at the inception of this program.

The terms and conditions of employment are as follows:

¢ For those persons so employed, the City will pay 3.75% toward a deferred compensation
plan in lieu of Social Security and the employee will pay a matching amount, 3.75%;

e Each position will be guaranteed to last for a minimum of six (6) months’ employment,
with extensions of six (6) months possible based on the needs of the Department;

e Each employee must work at least one eight-hour day per month;

© The City will pay for PORAC Legal Defense Fund coverage for each employee during
the time that they are employed (approximately $6.00/month per employee);

¢ A person employed under this Side Letter who is terminated prior to the end of the six-
month period shall be entitled to appeal that termination to the Chief of Police only and
shall not have access to any other appeal procedure provided to full time permanent
employees;

° A person employed under this Side Letter will normally work no more than 20 hours per
week and will be considered an “at will” employee;

e The parties recognize that for those employees who have retired under the provisions of
the Public Employees Retirement System (PERS), the regulations of that system limit
employment by a PERS agency, such as the City, to 960 hours per calendar year;
First Side Letter Amendment to SAPOA MOU 2004-08
Page Two

¢ Persons employed under this Side Letter who work in excess of ten (10) hours per day
will be compensated for that time in excess of ten (10) hours at the rate of one and one-
half times their regular hourly rate.

This agreement will expire October 1, 2005.

VeSQ

Kathie S. Romero Mark Nichols

Employee Relations Manager President, Santa Ana\Police Officers
City of Santa Ana Association

al yo4 alefos

Date Date

  
EXTENSION
FIRST SIDE LETTER AMENDMENT TO THE
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA ANA AND
THE SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
FOR FISCAL YEARS 2004-08

Effective upon the signing of this Side Letter, the City of Santa Ana (City) and the Santa Ana
Police Officers Association (SAPOA) agree that they have met and conferred and agree to
amend Article III, of the Memorandum of Understanding between the City and SAPOA for
Fiscal Years 2004-08. This Side Letter Agreement is based on the parties’ acknowledgement
that the Police Department’s need to hire sworn police officers has impacted the ability to fill or
increase needed non-sworn full time positions.

This amendment provides for the terms and conditions of employment for those to be employed
on a part-time basis to fill the position of Background Investigator with the understanding that
the salary for said position will be set in accordance with the Basic Salary and Wage Schedule.
There will be no more than four (4) Background Investigators at the inception of this program.

The terms and conditions of employment are as follows:

For those persons so employed, the City will pay 3.75% toward a deferred compensation
plan in lieu of Social Security and the employee will pay a matching amount, 3.75%;

e Each position will be guaranteed to last for a minimum of six (6) months’ employment,
with extensions of six (6) months possible, based on the needs of the Department;

e Each employee must work at least one eight-hour day per month;

e The City will pay for PORAC Legal Defense Fund coverage for each employee during
the time that they are employed (approximately $6.00/month per employee);

e A person employed under this Side Letter who is terminated prior to the end of the six-
month period shall be entitled to appeal that termination to the Chief of Police only and
shall not have access to any other appeal procedure provided to full time permanent
employees;

« A person employed under this Side Letter will normally work no more than 20 hours per
week and will be considered an “at will” employee;

¢ The parties recognize that for those employees who have retired under the provisions of
the Public Employees Retirement System (PERS), the regulations of that system limit
employment by a PERS agency, such as the City, to 960 hours per calendar year;
First Side Letter Amendment to SAPOA MOU 2004-08 (Extension)
Page Two

* Persons employed under this Side Letter who work in excess of ten ( 10) hours per day
will be compensated for that time in excess of ten (10) hours at the rate of one and one-
half times their regular hourly rate.

The original agreement, scheduled to expire on October 1, 2005, has been extended by mutual
agreement until April 1, 2006.

Kathie S. GonZalez \ Mark Nichols
Employee Relations Manager President, Santa Ana Police Officers
City of Santa Ana Association

af ; / j oe

Vbdes / Gf lf 200 $

Date Date
SECOND SIDE LETTER AMENDMENT TO THE
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA ANA AND
THE SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
FOR FISCAL YEARS 2004-08

Effective upon the signing of this Side Letter, the City of Santa Ana (City) and the Santa Ana
Police Officers Association (SAPOA) agree that they have met and conferred and agree to
amend Article II] of the Memorandum of Understanding between the City and SAPOA for Fiscal
Years 2004-08. This Side Letter Agreement is based on the parties’ acknowledgement that the
Police Department’s need to hire sworn police officers has impacted the ability to fill or increase
needed non-sworn full time positions.

This amendment provides for the terms and conditions of employment for those to be employed
on a part-time basis to fill the position of Forensic Specialist I with the understanding that the
salary for said position will be set in accordance with the Basic Salary and Wage Schedule. This
Agreement provides for up to two (2) part-time Forensic Ballistics Technician positions.

The terms and conditions of employment are as follows:

¢ Essential functions of the position include, but are not limited to: responsibility for
complete evidentiary examination of firearms. This includes the proper Teceipt of
evidence firearms utilizing a “chain-of-custody”; adherence to strict weapons safety
guidelines, producing and maintaining firearm related documentation, photographic
preparation of submitted firearms suitable for court presentation; safety analysis of
individual weapons to include drop testing, push-off testing of revolvers, trigger pull
analysis, disconnect examination for semi-automatic weapons; responsible for weapons
test-firing which includes documentation preparation, proper ammunition selection, safe
test firing, recovery of test-fired cartridge cases and bullets, evidence preparation for test-
fired cartridge cases and bullets; ballistic computer entries of test-fired cartridge cases
and bullets into the NIBIN/IBIS cartridge case and bullet screening system; report writing
techniques and assistance in the initial screening of potential IBIS hits; record keeping
and maintenance of the department weapons catalog and library, and other firearms
related duties as assigned.

For those persons so employed, the City will pay 3.75% toward a deferred compensation
plan in lieu of Social Security and the employee will pay a matching amount, 3.75%;

¢ Each position will be guaranteed to last for a minimum of six (6) months’ employment,
with extensions of six (6) months possible based on the needs of the Department;

e Each employee must work at least one eight-hour day per month;

© The City will pay for PORAC Legal Defense Fund coverage for each employee during
the time that they are employed (approximately $6.00/month per employee);
Second Side Letter Amendment to SAPOA MOU 2004-08
Page Two

A person employed under this Side Letter who is terminated prior to the end of the six-
month period shall be entitled to appeal that termination to the Chief of Police only and
shall not have access to any other appeal procedure provided to full time permanent
employees;

A person employed under this Side Letter will normally work no more than 20 hours per
weck and will be considered an “at will” employee;

The parties recognize that for those employees who have retired under the provisions of
the Public Employees Retirement System (PERS), the regulations of that system limit
employment by a PERS agency, such as the City, to 960 hours per calendar year;

Persons employed under this Side Letter who work in excess of ten (10) hours per day
will be compensated for that time in excess of ten (10) hours at the rate of one and one-
half times their regular hourly rate.

This agreement will expire June 30, 2006.

dass. Jee

Kathie S. Romero

    

Mark Nichols

Employee Relations Manager President, Santa Ana Police Officers
City of Santa Ana Association

Wes B/Bleos”

Date
THIRD SIDE LETTER AMENDMENT TO THE
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA ANA AND
THE SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
FOR FISCAL YEARS 2004-08

Effective upon the signing of this Side Letter, the City of Santa Ana (City) and the Santa Ana
Police Officers Association (SAPOA) agree that they have met and conferred and agree to
amend Article III of the Memorandum of Understanding between the City and SAPOA for Fiscal
Years 2004-08. This Side Letter Agreement is based on the parties’ acknowledgement that the
Police Department’s need to hire a part-time dispatcher for a period of twelve months beginning
August 1, 2005 and ending July 31, 2006 to assist in staff shortages projected for that time
period. During this six-month timeframe the City and the SAPOA agree to meet and confer on
the continuing desire of the City to recruit part-time dispatchers. The City’s desire to use part-
time dispatchers is based on operational need and intends to work with the SAPOA in
demonstrating the validity of this need.

This amendment provides for the terms and conditions of employment on a part-time basis to fill
the position of Police Services Dispatcher with the understanding that the salary for said position
will be set in accordance with the Basic Salary and Wage Schedule. This Agreement provides
for one (1) part-time Police Services Dispatcher.

The terms and conditions of employment are as follows:

e For those persons so employed, the City will pay 3.75% toward a deferred compensation
plan in lieu of Social Security and the employee will pay a matching amount, 3.75%;

e Each position will be guaranteed to last for a minimum of twelve (12) months’
employment, with extensions of six (6) months possible based on the needs of the
Department;

e Each employee must work at least one eight-hour day per month;

¢ The City will pay for PORAC Legal Defense Fund coverage for each employee during
the time that they are employed (approximately $6.00/month per employee);

e A person employed under this Side Letter who is terminated prior to the end of the twelve
(12)month period shall be entitled to appeal that termination to the Chief of Police only
and shall not have access to any other appeal procedure provided to full time permanent
employees;

e A person employed under this Side Letter will normally work no more than 20 hours per
week and will be considered an “at will” employee;
Third Side Letter Amendment to SAPOA MOU 2004-08
Page Two

° The parties recognize that for those employees who have retired under the provisions of
the Public Employees Retirement System (PERS), the regulations of that system limit
employment by a PERS agency, such as the City, to 960 hours per calendar year;

© Persons employed under this Side letter who work in excess of those hours regularly
assigned to the Police Services Dispatcher’s Standard Work Period workday or hours in

excess of 40 hours per Work Period shall be compensated for that time worked in excess
at the overtime rate of one and one-half times their regular hourly rate.

This agreement will expire July 31, 2006.

ass, A

    

Kathie S. Gor Mark Nichols
Employee Relations Manager President, Santa Ana Police Officers
City of Santa Ana Association

/
4 ios

Date

 
FOURTH SIDE LETTER AMENDMENT TO THE
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA ANA AND
THE SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2004-08

Effective August 7, 2005, the City of Santa Ana (City) and the Santa Ana Police Officers
Association (SAPOA) agree that they have met and conferred and agree to amend Article VIII of
the Memorandum of Understanding between the City and SAPOA for Fiscal Years 2004-08.
Modifications to this Article shall be in “bold” type.

8.4C Use of Comp Time.

1. When an employee submits a request for time off using accrued compensatory time,
and that employee has found a qualified replacement, the time off request will be granted.
“Qualified” means that the replacement officer or employee is able to fulfill the requirements of
the position to which the requesting officer is assigned.

a. Effective August 7, 2005, compensatory time off requests made for
consideration during the monthly scheduling meetings will be treated as any other time off
and granted only on the basis of seniority.

b. Pursuant to the new 3-12 Operating Rules, officers may trade work days
with other officers within the 28-day development period. Any trades must be approved by
the affected Lieutenants and the Field Operations Bureau Commander.

2. When an employee submits a request to take time off using accrued compensatory
time and the officer deployment is above minimum staffing for that day, then the request will be
granted without further conditions. However, if the number of officers scheduled to work on the
day(s) of the request is at or below minimum staffing as defined by the department, the
compensatory time off request will be granted only if a qualified replacement has volunteered
and committed to work the assignment left open by the request for time off. The volunteer may
exchange days off with the requesting employee within the 28-day deployment period, or may
elect to receive overtime compensation, subject to the rules contained in this Side Letter.

3. Requests for use of compensatory time off during holidays as defined by the
current MOU must be submitted in time to be considered during the monthly scheduling meeting
held by bureau and division commanders for the upcoming month. These requests will be
considered by seniority and will be granted only if officer deployment is above minimum
staffing. The policy of the department has been, and will continue to be, that compensatory
time off requested during a City-designated holiday will be treated as any other time off
request and will be granted in order of seniority as long as minimum staffing levels are
met. The replacement policy in 8.4C4 below will not apply to compensatory time off
requests submitted for consideration during monthly scheduling meetings.
4. Although it is always preferable for the officer to find a qualified replacement when
requesting the use of compensatory time off, if provided sufficient notice of a request for time
off, the department will work with employees to find a qualified replacement. Sufficient notice
and reasonable period will be defined as follows:

a. Seventy-two (72) hours notice for one (1) day or less of time off requested.

b. Five (5) calendar days notice for more than one (1) workday up to one (1)
workweek.

c. Fourteen (14) calendar days notice for more than one (1) week compensatory
time off request.

5. Ifan employee has provided sufficient notice of a compensatory time off request, the
department will work with the employee to find a qualified replacement in the following manner:

a. The watch commander will maintain a calendar of time off that has been
requested in accordance with the guidelines listed above. Qualified employees will
be allowed to volunteer to work these shifts. In the future, the department may
develop, at its own discretion, an automated schedule that will contain this
information.

b. If an employee volunteers and signs up to work for another employee who has
requested compensatory time off, that volunteering employee will be held
responsible for working that full shift without further reminder. Employees who
do not show up to work, or retract their offer to replace another officer, may be
subject to disciplinary action and may not be permitted to volunteer to work in this
manner in the future.

6. The watch commander shall send out an e-mail message to all officers requesting a
volunteer to cover the shift by switching days off or working on overtime.

7. When a compensatory time off request is made in a manner that does not comply

with this policy, and granting that request would unduly disrupt the operations of the department,
the department may deny that request.

A

Vik Sf Cx

    

Kathie S. Gonzalez) Mark Nichols
Employee Relations Manager President, Santa Ana Police Officers
Association

G y, Rf HOY
Date

 
A-A004- 222

JULY 1, 2004 — JUNE 30, 2008

MEMORANDUM
OF

UNDERSTANDING

CITY OF SANTA ANA
AND

SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
EXHIBIT
EXHIBIT

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF SANTA ANA AND

THE SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
FOR FISCAL YEARS 2004-05 THROUGH 2007-08

I

Ir
IIir
Iv
Vv
vI
VII
VIII
IX

XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI
XXII
XXIII
XXIV

XXV
XXVI
XXVIT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

RECOGNITION

NON-DISCRIMINATION CLAUSE

ATTENDANCE, WORKDAY AND WORKWEEK

SALARIES

ASSIGNMENT AND OTHER SPECIAL PAY ADDITIVES

CAREER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

OVERTIME

HOLIDAYS

VACATION

OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE

EMPLOYEE INSURANCE

RETIREMENT

RELEASE TIME FOR ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVE

SAFETY

RESIDENCY

DISCIPLINE

GRIEVANCE REVIEW PROCEDURE

DUES DEDUCTION AND INDEMNIFICATION

CITY RIGHTS

STRIKES AND WORK STOPPAGES

LAYOFFS

SOLE AND ENTIRE AGREEMENT

WAIVER OF BARGAINING DURING THE TERM OF
THIS AGREEMENT

SEPARABILITY PROVISION

TERM OF AGREEMENT

RATIFICATION AND EXECUTION

BASIC SALARY AND WAGE SCHEDULE

ASSIGNMENT OF CLASSES TO SALARY RATE RANGES

10
16
22
27
30
37
39
43
53
56
59
61
62
63
65
68
69
71
72
74

75
76
77
78
80
82
ARTICLE I
1.0 RECOGNITION
Pursuant to the provision of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act,

Government Code Section 3500, et seq., the City of Santa Ana
(hereinafter called the "City") has recognized the Santa Ana

Police Officers Association (herein called the
"Association") as the recognized representative of the
bargaining unit which includes police department employees
in the sworn, "safety-member" classifications and

assignments of Police Officer, Senior Police Officer, Police
Sergeant, Senior Police Sergeant and in the non-sworn,
"miscellaneous-member" classifications and assignments of
Animal Service Officer I and II, Background Investigator,
Communications Services Officer, Crime Research Analyst,
DARE Officer, Darkroom Technician, Detention Officer,
Firearms Examiner, Forensic Specialist I and II, Forensic
Services Supervisor, Parking Control Officer, Police
Communications Supervisor, Police Community Services
Specialist, Police Evidence and Supply Specialist, Police
Investigative Specialist, Police Property and Evidence
Specialist, Police Property and Evidence Supervisor, Police
Recruit, Police Service Assistant, Police Service Officer,
Police Services Dispatcher, Rangemaster, Detention
Supervisor, Senior Parking Control Officer, and Traffic
Services Specialist and excludes all other employees of the
Police Department.
ARTICLE II
2.0 NON-DISCRIMINATION CLAUSE

The City and Association agree that they shall not
discriminate against any employee in violation of State or
Federal law. The City and the Association shall reopen any
provision of this Agreement for the purpose of complying
with any order of a Federal or State agency or court of
competent jurisdiction requiring a modification or change in
any provisions of this Agreement in compliance with State or
Federal anti-discrimination laws.

Whenever reference is made to the masculine gender it shall
be understood to include the feminine gender, unless
expressly stated otherwise.
ARTICLE IIT

3.0 ATTENDANCE, WORK PERIOD, WORK SCHEDULE & WORKDAY

Attendance. Employees covered by this Agreement shall be in
attendance at their work location during hours prescribed by
the Police Chief or his designee(s) and shall not absent
themselves during prescribed hours without approval of the
Police Chief or his designee(s).

Definitions.

A.

Standard Work Period. The Standard Work Period shall
consist of a consecutive seven (7) day, 168 hour
period.

Alternative Work Period--207(k) Exempt Employees. The
Alternative Work Period shall apply to all members of
the Association who are peace officers, detention
officers or detention supervisors who are exempt from
the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA) pursuant to Section 207(k). The 207(k)
employees’ Work Period shall consist of a consecutive
28 day, 672 hour time period. In conformance with the
FLSA, members who are peace officers, detention
officers, or detention supervisors shall not be
eligible for FLSA overtime, as defined under the FLSA
for employees assigned to the Alternate Work Period
until they have worked in excess of 171 hours in the
Alternate Work Period. Nothing in this section shall
prevent a peace officer, detention officer or detention
supervisor from earning overtime and being compensated
for overtime based on the overtime provisions of this
Agreement as stated in Article VIII of this Agreement.
All overtime shall be paid at one and one-half (1 1/2)
times the regular rate of pay.

Work Hours. Work hours are the regularly scheduled
hours of work as determined by the Police Chief or his
designee. A “day” is defined as any consecutive 24
hour period.

Work Schedules. At this time, the Police Chief has
established the following work schedules. These
schedules may be changed by the Police Chief subject to
the provisions of the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act. Unless
exigent circumstances exist, the Police Chief, or his
designee, shall inform the Association prior to the
changing of the below designated Work Schedules.

1. Standard Work Period Schedules.

a. 5/40 Work Schedule. Employees shall work
five (5) eight hour workdays per seven (7)
consecutive day, 168 hour Standard Work
Period. Each workday shall consist of eight
(8) hours of work and a 30 minute unpaid
meal period.

4/10 Work Schedule. Employees shall work
four (4) 10 hour days per seven (7)
consecutive day, 168 hour Standard Work
Period. Each workday shall consist of 10
hours of work, and either a 30 minute or one
(1) hour unpaid meal period. The
determination as to a 30 minute or one (1)
hour unpaid meal period shall be made by the
Police Chief or his designee.

9/80 Work Schedule. Employees shall work
four (4) nine hour days and one (1) four
hour day in each seven (7) consecutive day,
168 hour Standard Work Period. Each nine
(9) hour workday shall consist of nine (9)
hours of work and either a 30 minute or one
(1) hour unpaid meal period. The eight hour
workday shall consist of four (4) hours
applied to the first seven (7) day period
and four (4) hours applied to the second
seven (7) day period divided by either a 30
minute or one (1) hour unpaid meal period.
The determination as to a 30 minute or one
(1) hour unpaid meal period shall be made by
the Police Chief or his designee.

12/40 Work Schedule. Employees shall work
three (3) 12 hour and 30 minute workdays and
one (1) four hour workday in each seven (7)
consecutive day, 168 hour Standard Work
Period. Effective November 1, 2004, each
workday shall consist of 11 hours and 30
minutes of work, and a one (1) hour meal
period, 30 minutes of which shall be paid
and 30 minutes of which shall be unpaid, for
a total of 12 hours and 30 minutes. The
four (4) hour workday shall consist of four
(4) hours of work.

2. Alternate Work Period Schedules-207(k) Exempt
Employees.

a.

207(k) 3/12.5 Work Schedule - _ Patrol.
Employees shall work thirteen 12 hour and 30
minute workdays in each 28 day FLSA Work
Period. Of the 13 workdays, an employee
assigned to this schedule shall be required
to work one (1) 12 hour and 30 minute
“payback” day each 28 day FLSA Work Period,
scheduled or assigned pursuant to the
Department’s work schedule policy. Each
workday shall consist of 12 hours of work
and a 30 minute paid meal period. During
each 28 day FLSA Work Period, employees
shall work 162.5 hours. Upon completion of
this work schedule, employees will earn an
additional two (2) hours and 30 minutes of
vacation time, provided they do not take
leave without pay during that Work Period.
Employees assigned to this schedule are
compensated for their meal periods.
Consequently, if an employee is unable to
take his or her meal period, or is
interrupted during his or her meal period,
he or she shall not receive further
compensation.

207(k) 7/12.5 Work Schedule - Detention.
Employees shall work three (3) 12 hour and
30 minute workdays in one (1) seven day
period and four (4) 12 hour and 30 minute
workdays in the next seven (7) day period,
or alternatively, four (4) 12 hour and 30
minute workdays in the first seven (7) day
period and three (3) 12 hour and 30 minute
workdays in the following seven (7) day
period. This cycle shall be repeated twice
each 28 day FLSA Work Period. Effective
November 1, 2004, each workday shall consist
of 11 hours and 30 minutes of work and a one
(1) hour meal period, 30 minutes of which
shall be paid and 30 minutes of which shall
be unpaid, for a total of 12 hours and 30
minutes. During each 28 day FLSA Work
Period, employees assigned to the 207(k)
7/12.5 Work Schedule shall earn one (1) hour
of vacation time if they do not take leave
without pay during that Work Period.
Detention Officers will be compensated at
the time and a half overtime rate for all
time worked in excess of their regular work
shift of 12.5 hours per workday. The
overtime compensation will apply only to
actual time worked beyond the regular shift
and calculated in increments of six (6)
minutes.

207(k)4/10.5 Work Schedule-Detention
Administration. Employees shall work seven
(7) ten hour and 30 minute workdays and one
(1) ten hour workday during each two (2)
week period. This pattern will recur twice
during the 28 day FLSA Work Period. Each 10
hour and 30 minute workday shall consist of
10 hours and 30 minutes of work and either a
30 minute or one (1) hour unpaid meal
period. The 10 hour workday shall consist
of 10 hours of work and either a 30 minute
or one (1) hour unpaid meal period. The
determination as to a thirty (30) minute or
one (1) hour unpaid meal period shall be
made by the Police Chief or his designee.

207(k) 4/10 Work Schedule. Employees shall
work 16 ten hour workdays in each 28 day
FLSA Work Period. Each workday shall. consist
of 10 hours of work and either a 30 minute
or one (1) hour unpaid meal period. The
determination as to a 30 minute or one (1)
hour unpaid meal period shall be made by the
Police Chief or his designee.

207(k) 9/80 Work Schedule. Employees shall
work five (5) nine hour workdays in one (1)
seven (7) day span and three (3) nine hour
workdays and one (1) eight hour workday in
the second seven (7) day span, or
alternatively three (3) nine hour workdays
and one (1) eight hour workday in the first
seven (7) day span and five (5) nine hour
workdays in the second span. This cycle
shall be repeated twice each 28 day FLSA
Work Period. Each nine (9) hour workday
shall consist of nine (9) hours of work and
either a 30 minute or one (1) hour unpaid
meal period. The eight (8) hour workday
shall consist of eight (8) hours of work and
either a 30 minute or one (1) hour unpaid
meal period. The determination as to a 30
minute or one (1) hour unpaid meal period
shall be made by the Police Chief or his
designee.

207(k) 9/81 Work Schedule. Employees shall
work 81 hours in a consecutive 14 day, 336
hour period. This cycle shall be repeated
twice each 28 day FLSA Work Period.
Employees shall work five (5) nine hour
workdays in one (1) seven (7) day span and
four (4) nine hour workdays in the second
seven (7) day span. Each nine hour workday
shall consist of nine (9) hours of work and
either a 30 minute or one (1) hour unpaid
meal period. While assigned to the 9/81
schedule, an officer shall earn two (2)
hours of overtime during each 28 day FLSA
Work Period, unless he or she takes leave
without pay during the 28 day, 672 hour
period.

Part Time Employment. During the term of this Agreement, no
presently existing full-time positions will be eliminated as
the result of the use of part-time employee(s) and, to the
extent possible, when the workload of any one or more part-
time employee(s) would justify the addition of a full-time
position or positions, the parties will meet and confer
regarding the addition of a full-time position or positions,
subject to City Council approval.

The City and Association agree that, for a one-year period,
effective October 1, 2004, the City shall employ four (4)
part-time Background Investigators. Additionally, effective
February 1, 2005, the City shall employ up to two (2) part-
time Forensic Specialist I’s. The terms and conditions of
said employment shall be set forth in side letters between
the City and Association.

Code Seven. Except for those employees assigned to Patrol,
other employees whose meal periods are interrupted by the
performance of job related duties, will receive another
full, uninterrupted lunch period or will be compensated for
their lunch period at their overtime rate of pay at time and
one-half their regular rate of pay. For purposes of this
section, “interrupted” shall mean a significant interruption
of more than a few minutes (deminimus). For employees who
receive a one-hour lunch period (half of which is paid
overtime compensation shall apply only to the unpaid half-
hour. Unless exigent circumstances exist beyond the
Department’s control, employees assigned to Patrol shall be
provided a 30 minute paid meal period. Should an employee's
meal period be interrupted, every effort shall be made to
allow the affected employee to resume his/her meal period
for the remaining unused time, not to exceed the 30 minute
total meal period.
ARTICLE IV
4.0 SALARIES

Basic Compensation Plan. There is hereby established a
basic compensation plan for all members of the Santa Ana
Police Officers Association who are now employed or will in
the future be employed in any of the designated
classifications of employment listed in this Agreement and
its attachments.

Salary Schedule. The basic salary schedule, attached hereto
in a matrix format as Exhibit A, and made a part hereof as
though set forth in full herein, provides numerous salary
rate ranges, each comprised of five (5) steps or rates of

pay.

The respective rate ranges are identified by a three (3)
digit number. The steps within each range are identified by
the letters "A" through "E" inclusive, with the "A" step
being the lowest step in the range. The purpose of each step
and the length of service required for advancement to the
next higher step within a particular salary rate range are
set forth in Section 4.7 below.

Salary Adjustments.

A. The base salaries of employees covered by this
Agreement shall be adjusted as follows:

Effective July 1, 2004 through June 30, 2005 and July
1, 2005 through June 30, 2006, respectively, there
shall be no salary increases for employees covered by
this Agreement. If, however, any other City bargaining
unit receives an across-the-board salary increase
during the fiscal years defined above, employees
covered by this Agreement shall receive the highest
amount provided to any City bargaining unit.

Effective July 1, 2006, the base salary of employees
covered by this Agreement shall be increased by the
greater of the following amounts: 1) that percentage
increase necessary, rounded to the nearest half-percent
(.5%), mot to exceed nine (9) salary rate ranges
(approximately 4.5%), to ensure that the top step level
base salary of a Santa Ana Police Officer is higher
than the top step base salary for the position of
police officer in any other municipal police department
in Orange County or the position of deputy sheriff in
the Orange County Sheriff’s Department, on that date;
or 2) that percentage increase in an across-the-board
salary adjustment provided to any other City bargaining
unit during fiscal year 2006-07.

10
Effective July 1, 2007, the base salary of employees
covered by this Agreement shall be increased by the
greater of the following amounts: 1) that percentage
increase necessary, rounded to the nearest half-percent
(.5%), not to exceed nine (9) salary rate ranges
(approximately 4.5%), to ensure that the top step base
salary of a Santa Ana Police Officer is higher than the
top step base salary for the position of police officer
for any other municipal police department in Orange
County or the position of deputy sheriff in the Orange
County Sheriff’s Department, on that date; or 2) that
percentage increase in an across-the-board salary
adjustment provided to any other City bargaining unit
for fiscal year 2007-08.

Equity Adjustment. In addition to the across-the-board
salary adjustments identified in 4.3A above, effective
November 1, 2004, the salary rate range assigned to the
class of Forensic Specialist I shall be increased by
ten (10) salary rate ranges (approximately 5%).

The assignment of classes to salary rate ranges is
listed in Exhibit B, which is attached and made a part
hereof as though set forth herein.

Effective July 1, 2001, and in the event the City
incurs an employer cost, safety employees covered by
this Agreement will contribute up to 1.42% of their
salary toward the 3% at 50 retirement benefit. Due to
excessive employer contribution rates, effective July
1, 2004 and during the term of this Agreement, the
agreed upon employee contribution rate shall be the
maximum of 1.42%.

Effective July 1, 1998, employees will contribute one-
half percent (.5%) of their base salary plus pay
additives through payroll deduction to a = fund
maintained by the Santa Ana Police Officers Association
for the purpose of providing retiree health insurance
premium reduction assistance.

Effective July 1, 1999, employees will contribute an
additional one-half percent (.5%) for a total of one
percent (1%) of their base salary plus pay additives
through payroll deduction to a fund maintained by the
Santa Ana Police Officers Association for the purpose
of providing retiree health insurance premium reduction
assistance. This payroll deduction for retiree health
insurance premium reduction assistance will continue
until such time as the parties may mutually agree to
end said deduction.

11
Additionally, effective October 1, 2006 and October 1,
2007, respectively, the City shall contribute an amount
equal to one-half percent (.5%) of the bargaining
unit’s annual base salary, including pay additives, for
the purpose of providing retiree health insurance
premium reduction assistance.

Application of Basic Compensation Plan. The salary rate
ranges and steps contained in Exhibit A are monthly salary
rates. All officers and employees working in classifications
of employment covered by this Agreement shall be compensated
at a monthly rate, except that an employee hired for
temporary work in a position which has an anticipated
duration of less than six (6) months shall be paid at a rate
per hour for actual time spent in the performance of the
duties of his or her employment. Any hourly rate of pay,
defined as the regular hourly rate of pay, shall be computed
by dividing the monthly salary rate plus pay additives by
173.33. In determining the hourly rate as herein provided,
computation shall be made to the nearest whole cent and a
computation resulting in exactly one-half cent or higher
shall fix the rate at the next higher whole cent.

Beginning Rates. A new employee of the City of Santa Ana
shall be paid the rate shown as Step "A" in the salary rate
range allocated to the class of employment for which he or
she has been hired. In special instances where such new
employee possesses unique and exceptional education,
training and/or experience qualifications, the department
head under whom the employee will serve, may submit a
written request and justification to the City Manager for
authorization to place such new employee on Step "B" or Step
"C" within the allocated salary rate range, provided that
such employee shall be assigned such salary step upon the
commencement of his or her service in the classification of
employment to which the salary rate range applies and such
assignment having once been made shall remain in effect
until the said employee shall be entitled to advance to the
next salary step in accordance with the further provisions
of this Article.

Service. The word "service" as used in this Agreement shall
be deemed to mean continuous, full-time service in the
classification in which the officer or employee is being
considered for salary advancement, service in the higher
classification or service in a classification allocated to
the same salary rate range and having generally similar
duties and requirements. Employees hired after the first
(lst) working day of the month shall not be credited with
"time-in-service" for that month when determining the length
of service required for salary step advancement. A lapse of
service by an officer or employee for a period of time
longer than thirty (30) calendar days by reason of
resignation, quit, or discharge, shall serve to eliminate
the accumulated length of service time of such officer or
employee for the purpose of this Agreement and any such
officer or employee reentering the service of the City shall
be considered as a new officer or employee, except that he
or she may be reappointed within one (1) year and may be
placed in the same salary step in the appropriate salary
range as he or she was at the time of termination of
employment .

Advancement Within Ranges. The following regulations shall
govern salary advancement within rate ranges:

A. Length of Service Advancements. After the salary of an
officer or employee has been first established and
fixed under this plan, such officer or employee shall
be advanced from Step "A" to Step "B" or from Step "B"
to Step "C" or from Step "C" to Step "D," whichever is
the next higher step to that on which the officer or
employee has been previously paid, effective the first
day of the month following the date of completion of
the length of service for such advancement as provided
in Exhibit B of this Agreement.

B. Merit Advance. An officer or employee shall be
considered for advancement from Step "D" to Step "E"
upon the completion of the required length of service
as provided in Section 4.2 and Exhibit A of this
Agreement. The effective date of such merit increase,
if granted, shall be on the first day of the month
following the completion of such required length of
service. Advancement to Step "E" may be granted only
for continued meritorious and efficient service and
continued improvement by the officer or employee in the
effective performance of the duties of his or her
position. Such merit advancement shall require the
following:

1. There shall be on file in the office of the chief
personnel officer a copy of each periodic
efficiency or performance report required to be
made on the officer or employee by the Santa Ana
Municipal Code and/or the City Manager during the
period of service time of such officer or
employee subsequent to this last salary
advancement.

2. The Police Chief, at least twenty (20) calendar
days prior to the anticipated completion of such
officer's or employee's required length of
service, shall file with the City Manager a
statement recommending the granting or denial for
the merit increase and supporting such

13
-10

recommendations with specific reasons therefore.

3. No advancement in salary above Step "D" shall
become effective until approved by the City
Manager, except when placement on a salary step
above Step "D" results from promotion under the
provisions of Section 4.9 of this Article.

c. Length of Service Required When Advancement Denied.
When an officer or employee has not been approved for
advancement to the merit step E, he or she may be
reconsidered for such advancement after the completion
of three (3) months of additional service and shall be
reconsidered for such advancement after the completion
of six (6) months of additional service. This
reconsideration shall follow the same steps and shall
be subject to the same actions as provided in
Subparagraphs B (2) and B (3) of this Section.

Reduction in Salary Steps. Any officer or employee who is
being paid on merit step E may be reduced to Step "D" of the

appropriate salary range, upon the recommendation of the
Police Chief, and the approval of the City Manager.
Procedure for such reduction shall follow the same procedure
as outlined for merit advancements in Section 4.7 above, and
such officer or employee may be considered for readvancement
under the same provisions as contained in Subsection C of
Section 4.7.

Promotional Salary Advancement. When an officer or employee
is promoted to a position in a higher classification from a
position in a lower classification in the same occupational
career ladder, he or she shall be reassigned to Step "A" in
the appropriate salary rate range for the higher
classification; provided however, that if the base salary
step currently being paid such officer or employee is
already equal to or higher than said Step "A," he or she
will be placed in the lowest step in the appropriate salary
rate range as will grant that officer or employee an
increase of at least one (1) salary step over his or her
current base salary step including any additive or additives
such as career development or educational incentive pay, but
excluding shift differential, assignment pay and bilingual
pay.

Demotion. When an officer or employee is demoted to a
position in a lower classification, his or her salary rate
shall be fixed in the appropriate salary rate range for the
lower classification in accordance with the following
provisions:

A. The salary rate shall be reduced by at least one (1)
step.
4.11

B. The new salary rate must be within the appropriate
salary rate range.

Cc. The new salary rate shall not be higher than the salary
step to which the officer or employee would have been
entitled had his or her service time in the higher
classification been spent in the lower classification.

D. If the salary rate recommended by the Police Chief is
lower than the maximum step permissible under
Subsection C above, such recommendation shall be
considered a reduction in pay in addition to the
demotion and shall be handled in accordance with the
provisions for salary reductions (Section 4.8, above) .

Reallocation of Salary Rate Ranges. Any officer or employee
who is employed in a classification which is reallocated to
a different salary rate range from that previously assigned
shall be retained in the same salary step in the new salary
rate range as he or she had previously held in the prior
rate range and shall retain credit for length of service in
such step towards advancement to the next higher step.

 

Direct Paycheck Deposit. The City and Association agree to
form a Citywide task force to determine the feasibility of
implementing a direct paycheck deposit system. If agreed to
by all parties, the new system will be implemented by
January 1, 2001, or as soon as practicable thereafter.

Deferred Compensation. If, during the term of this
Agreement,the City agrees to match employee Deferred
Compensation contributions for members of any other
bargaining unit, then employees covered by this Agreement
shall receive the same benefit.

15
ARTICLE V

5.0 ASSIGNMENT AND OTHER SPECIAL PAY ADDITIVES

Assignment Pay Differentials.

Effective the first day of the first full month following
Council approval of this Agreement, assignment pay
differentials, as listed herein and throughout the contract,
will, in each case, be added individually and separately to
the employee’s base salary. In no event shall one
assignment pay differential be added to the employee’s base
salary as a basis for the calculation of an additional pay
differential.

A. An incumbent in the class of Police Services Dispatcher
who is continuously and regularly assigned to and
actually performing in a lead supervisory and trainer
capacity over an assigned shift of Police Services
Dispatchers will be paid at a rate set ten (10) salary
rate ranges (approximately 5.0%) above his or her then
current base monthly salary step.

B. Personnel in the class of Forensic Specialist I, who
are regularly and continuously assigned to and actually
performing duties in a "lead” supervisory capacity over
a primary functional unit of Forensic Specialist I
employees, will be paid at a rate set ten (10) salary
rate ranges (approximately 5.0%) above their then
current base monthly salary step.

c. An incumbent in the class of Police Officer who is
continuously and regularly assigned to and actually
performing duties of a Corporal will be paid at a rate
set five (5) salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%)
above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

Effective July 1, 2005, if a Corporal is assigned to
lead a work unit without a Sergeant, he or she will be
paid an additional five (5) salary rate ranges
(approximately 2.5%) above his or her base monthly
salary step for such assignment. At the present time,
Directed Patrols and Civic Center Patrol units are
examples of such assignments.

D. An incumbent in the class of Detention Officer who is
continuously and regularly assigned to and actually
performing duties of a Senior Detention Officer will be
paid at a rate set five (5) salary rate ranges
(approximately 2.5%) above his or her then current base
monthly salary step.

16
The Police Chief at his discretion and based on the
department's need may assign sworn officers to standby
status for non-work days or other days as determined by
the Police Chief. Officers thus assigned will be
compensated at the rate of two (2) hours of straight
time per day of standby duty. Officers assigned to
standby status on non-work days will not lose their
standby pay when called to duty, if they have been on
call for at least six (6) hours when called. If
officers on standby status are called to duty after
having been on call for less than six (6) hours, they
will be paid for their response to work, but not for
their standby status.

An employee who is continuously and regularly assigned
as a Training Officer working in either Field
Operations or the Detention facility will be paid at a
rate set five (5) salary rate ranges (approximately
2.5%) above his or her then current base monthly salary
step.

An employee who is continuously and regularly assigned
to and actually performing duties of an Internal
Affairs Officer will be paid at a rate set five (5)
salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%) above his or
her then current base monthly salary step.

Effective July 1, 2003, an employee who is continuously
and regularly assigned to perform training functions as
a Parking Control Officer will be paid at a rate set
five (5) salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%) above
his or her then current base monthly salary step.

Effective November 1, 2004, an incumbent in the class
of Police Officer who is continuously and regularly
assigned as a Canine Officer will be paid at a rate set
ten (10) salary rate ranges (approximately 5%) above
his or her then current base monthly salary step. This
pay shall be considered compensation for the care and
feeding of the dog and will be in lieu of the thirty
(30) minutes of time each day currently provided for
such purpose.

Effective July 1, 2005, an incumbent in the class of
Police Officer who is continuously and regularly
assigned to and actually performing duties of a Motor
Officer assigned to the Traffic Division will be paid
at a rate set five (5) salary rate ranges
(approximately 2.5%) above his or her then current base
monthly salary step.

Effective July 1, 2005, an incumbent, identified by the
Police Department, who is continuously and regularly

17
assigned to and actually performing duties of a
Detective/Investigator assigned to the Investigations
Division or Special Investigations Units as well as
Police Investigative Specialist, Background
Investigator, Collision Investigator, and Graffiti Task
Force Investigator, will be paid at a rate set five (5

salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%) above his or
her then current base monthly salary step.

L. Effective November 1, 2004, each employee in the class
of Detention Officer or Detention Supervisor, who is
continuously and regularly assigned to either the
207(k) 7/12.5 Detention Work Schedule, or the 4/10.5
Detention Administration Work Schedule, shall be paid
at a rate set six (6) salary rate ranges (approximately
3%) above his or her then current base monthly salary
step. This assignment pay is compensation for the
additional 30 minutes work or briefing time each day.

M. Personnel in the class of Firearms Examiner who are
regularly and continuously assigned to and actually
performing duties in a “lead” supervisory capacity over
a primary functional unit, will be paid at a rate set
ten (10) salary rate ranges (approximately 5.0%) above
their then current base monthly salary step.

Shift Differential, Non-Sworn Personnel. Each employee in
the classes of Animal Service Officer I, Animal Service
Officer II, Forensic Specialist I, Crime Research Analyst,
Forensic Specialist II, Police Communications Supervisor,
Police Investigative Specialist, Police Property & Evidence
Specialist, Police Service Officer, Police Evidence and
Supply Specialist, Police Services Dispatcher,
Communications Services Officer, Detention Officer, and
Detention Supervisor, and Parking Control Officer who is
continuously and regularly assigned to a schedule of work
which requires that he or she actually work a minimum of
four and one-half (4 1/2) hours between the hours of 5:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M. will be paid a shift differential at a
rate set ten (10) salary rate ranges (approximately 5.0%

above his or her then current base monthly salary step.

Bilingual Pay. Qualified employees who meet the following
criteria shall be paid a monthly pay differential, above his
or her base monthly salary step, as follows:

A. Assignment by the Police Chief or his designee to a
position requiring bilingual capability in both English
and one of the following languages: Spanish, Samoan,
Vietnamese, Cambodian, Korean, Hmong or other language
designated by the City Manager; and

B. Certification by the chief personnel officer as having

18
satisfactorily demonstrated the required level of
fluency in both languages.

c. Sworn: Street Level Proficiency in Spanish. A Police
Officer or Sergeant who successfully demonstrates the
required level of bilingual fluency as determined by
the chief personnel officer shall be paid a bilingual
pay differential in an amount equal to the product
obtained by multiplying the Step “E” base salary rate
of Police Officer by five (5) salary rate ranges
(approximately 2.5%).

Employees receiving “Street Level Proficiency”
incentive pay may be required, as a condition of
continued eligibility to receive such incentive pay, to
successfully complete an eight (8) hour refresher
course once every twelve months from the date of
initial certification.

D. Sworn: Complex Level Proficiency in Designated
Languages. A Police Officer or Police Sergeant who
successfully demonstrates the required level of
bilingual fluency as determined by the chief personnel
officer shall be paid a bilingual pay differential in
an amount equal to the product obtained by multiplying
the Step “E” base salary rate of Police Officer by ten
(10) salary rate ranges (approximately 5%).

 

 

E. Non Sworn: Secondary Level Proficiency in Designated
Languages. A non-sworn employee who successfully

demonstrates the required level of bilingual fluency as
determined by the chief personnel officer shall be paid
a monthly differential of forty dollars ($40) above his
or her then current base monthly salary step.

 

F. Non-sworn: Primary Level Proficiency in Designated
Languages. A non-sworn employee who successfully

demonstrates the required level of bilingual fluency as
determined by the chief personnel officer shall be paid
a monthly differential of one hundred seventy-five
dollars ($175) above his or her then current base
monthly salary step.

All assignments to positions set forth in Sections 5.1, 5.2,
5.3 above of sworn and non-sworn personnel shall be made or
revoked in a fair manner at the discretion of the Police
Chief.

Temporary Upgrade Assignment Pay. The parties acknowledge
that from time to time it may be necessary for the

department to fill a vacant, full-time budgeted, higher-
level position. The parties agree that such a position may
be filled by an eligible unit member for an initial period
of up to six (6) months, and at the discretion of the Chief
of Police, for an additional six (6) months; and that the
employee assigned to fill such a position shall receive
Temporary Upgrade Assignment Pay as set forth below:

A. Eligibility.

Full-time employees shall be assigned to fill a vacant,
full-time budgeted, higher-level position, and shall
receive Temporary Upgrade Assignment Pay for filling
that position, when the occupier of that position is
not performing the duties of that position for a period
of two (2) consecutive calendar weeks or more. An
employee filling a position under this section who is
absent for two (2) days or less during the two (2)
consecutive calendar week period will not lose his or
her eligibility for Temporary Upgrade Assignment Pay;
however, the days of absence shall not be counted in
the computation of the two week period.

In computing qualifying service or temporary upgrade
assignment pay only full days of actual duty shall be
included. Partial days shall not be combined to make
full days unless they are holiday hours. Holiday time
off will be included in computing actual duty days.

Employees holding the position immediately subordinate
to the vacant, full-time, budgeted, higher-level
position to be filled shall be given first
consideration to said position consistent with the
operational needs of the department. When there is
more than one (1) employee holding the position
immediately subordinate to the vacant, full-time,
budgeted, higher-level position to be filled, the most
senior employee holding one of the immediately
subordinate positions shall be assigned to said
position consistent with the operational needs of the
department.

Non-permanent employees (probationary, part-time,
seasonal, etc.) and employees performing work above
their regular class in a training capacity shall not be
assigned to a vacant, full-time, budgeted, higher-level
position in accordance with this section unless
specifically authorized by the City Manager.

B. Compensation.

a. After an employee has served two (2) consecutive
calendar weeks in a vacant, full-time, budgeted,
higher-level position, he shall be compensated at
the Temporary Upgrade Assignment Pay rate for
each full day that he is assigned to the higher-
level position, retroactive to the first (1%*) day

20
of said assignment.

An employee serving in a Temporary Upgrade
Assignment will be paid a temporary assignment
pay premium at a rate set ten (10) salary rate
ranges (approximately 5%) above their then
current base monthly salary step.

An employee assigned to a vacant, full-time
budgeted, higher-level position not represented
by this bargaining unit will retain all fringe
benefits afforded to members of this bargaining
unit, if the employee remains eligible for such
pay while in the temporary assignment, in
accordance with this MOU, but will not be
eligible for any benefits afforded to members of
the bargaining unit for the position to which he
or she is temporarily assigned.

An employee assigned to a vacant, full-time,
budgeted, higher-level position will continue to
accrue, and have recorded, general, special, or
normal salary step increases in the employee’s
permanent position; however, such salary increase
will be paid only to maintain the minimum ten
(10) salary rate range (approximately 5%)
differential required by this section.

21
ARTICLE VI

6.0 CAREER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

Definitions. For the purpose of clarifying the criteria for
the Police Career Development Program designations set forth
in Sections 6.2 through 6.8 of this Article, the following
definitions apply:

A.

Educational Units. One (1) completed "semester" unit in
an academic. course of instruction approved by the
Police Chief and in an accredited college or university
shall equal one (1) educational unit. One (1) "quarter"
unit achieved in an educational institution as above
shall equal two-thirds (2/3) of an educational unit.
"Trimester" units or other standards of measurement
used as a basis in awarding scholastic credits will be
accorded the same evaluation and weight as provided by
the respective accredited college or university. Only
completed coursework credited with a letter grade "C"
or better or a grade of "Pass" when evaluated by the
"Pass/Fail" method will be accepted. If such ratings
are not rendered for a specific course, then a
certificate of successful completion must be submitted.

Training Units. Twenty (20) classroom hours or its
equivalent of approved police training shall equal one
unit.

Regular, periodic, on-the-job training programs shall
not be considered as fulfilling this requirement.
Neither shall the special training required for Crime
Scene Investigators and Advanced Officers or other
similar mandatory training (e.g., First Aid, C.P.R.
Recertification, etc.) nor the basic introductory
training or similar training given an employee during
his or her probationary period be given credit for the
awarding of training units.

1. When college credit is awarded for special
training in police work, such units of credit may
be counted for either training units or
educational units as the officer may select.

2. Training units may be earned by the assignment to
and performance of sworn police officer duties
(other than uniformed field patrol work in Field
Operations Division) with one (1) full and
continuous month of such assignment equal to one
(1) training unit. Credit for experience in
assignments other than patrol work in Field
Operations shall not be given, unless at least
three (3) full and continuous months of such

22
assignment have been completed. Not more than six
(6) units of training through assignment to non-
patrol duties may be earned in any one (1) year
and not more than fifteen (15) such training
units by assignment shall be used in meeting the
criteria for the Police Career Development
Program designations as set out in this Article.

Crime Scene Investigator (C.S.I.). Any sworn, safety-member
Police Officer who attains the following educational and
experience requirements and the approval as set out below
shall be paid an additional five (5) salary rate ranges
(2.5%) above his or her then current base monthly salary
step. The criteria for such designation shall be as follows:

A. Completion of two (2) years of experience as a sworn
Police Officer, at least one of which shall be in the
Santa Ana Police Department.

B. Completion (acquisition) of at least thirty (30)
educational and/or training units.

c. Assignment to and actual performance of the duties and
responsibilities of a C.S.I.

D. Completion of a special training course for Crime Scene
Investigators as developed and administered by the
Santa Ana Police Department or such alternative course
as designated for such purpose by the Police Chief.

E. Approval of the Police Chief. The number of such
designations as C.S.I. shall be no larger than the
requirements of the department as determined by the
Police Chief.

Senior Police Officer I. Any sworn, safety-member Police
Officer, regardless of duty assignment, who fulfills the
requirements established in this section shall be designated
as a Senior Police Officer I and shall be paid at a rate set
fifteen (15) salary rate ranges (approximately 7.5%) above
his or her then current base monthly salary step. The
criteria for such designation shall be as follows:

A. Completion of five (5) years of municipal police
experience in the Police Officer classification, of
which thirty (30) months must be with the Santa Ana
Police Department.

B. Completion (acquisition) of at least sixty (60)
educational and/or training units.

Cc. Approval of the Police Chief.

23
Senior Police Officer II. Any sworn, safety-member Police
Officer, regardless of duty assignment, who fulfills the
requirements established in this section shall be designated
as a Senior Police Officer II and shall be paid at a rate
set twenty-five (25) salary rate ranges (approximately
12.5%) above his or her then current base monthly salary
step in the Police Officer classification. The criteria for
such designation shall be as follows:

A. Completion of seven (7) years of municipal police
experience in the Police Officer classification, of
which thirty (30) months must be with the Santa Ana
Police Department.

B. Completion (acquisition) of at least ninety (90)
educational/training units; or possession of an
Associate of Arts degree from an accredited college
with an additional thirty (30) or more
educational/training units.

Cc. Approval of the Police Chief.

Senior Police Officer III. Any sworn, safety-member Police
Officer, regardless of duty assignment, who fulfills the
requirements established in this section shall be designated
as a Senior Police Officer III and shall be paid at a rate
set thirty (30) salary rate ranges (approximately 15%) above
his or her then current base monthly salary step in the
Police Officer classification. The criteria for such
designation shall be as follows:

A. Completion of nine (9) years of municipal police
experience in the Police Officer classification, of
which thirty (30) months must be with the Santa Ana
Police Department.

B. Completion (acquisition) of at least one hundred twenty
(120) educational/training units; or possession of an
Associate of Arts degree from an accredited college
with an additional sixty (60) or more
educational/training units.

Cc. Approval of the Police Chief.

Senior Police Sergeant_I. Any officer holding the rank of
Police Sergeant in the-Santa Ana Police Department,
regardless of duty assignment, who fulfills the requirements
established in this section shall be designated as a Senior
Police Sergeant I and shall be paid at a rate set fifteen
(15) salary rate ranges (approximately 7.5%) above his or
her then current base monthly salary step. The criteria for
such designation shall be as follows:

24
6.

7

A. Completion of five (5) years of municipal police
experience and be eligible for “Ek” step of the base
salary rate range of the Police Sergeant class.

“Bligible” as defined only for Section 6.6(A) means
that a Police Sergeant shall be considered for
advancement from Step “D” or “E” to Senior Police
Sergeant I upon the completion of the required length
of service as provided in Section 4.2 and Exhibit A of
this Agreement; the effective date of such increase
shall be on the first day of the month following
completion of such required length of service.

B. Completion (acquisition) of at least sixty (60
educational and/or training units.

c. Approval of the Police Chief.

Senior Police Sergeant II. Any officer holding the rank of
Police Sergeant in the Santa Ana Police Department,
regardless of duty assignment, who fulfills the requirements
established in this section shall be designated as a Senior
Police Sergeant II and shall be paid at a rate set twenty-
five (25) salary rate ranges (approximately 12.5%) above his
or her then current base monthly salary step in the Police
Sergeant class. The criteria for such designation shall be
as follows:

A. Completion of seven (7) years of municipal police
experience and be eligible for “EB” step of the base
salary rate range of the Police Sergeant class.

“Eligible” as defined only for Section 6.7(A) means
that a Police Sergeant shall be considered for
advancement from Step “D” or “EB” to Senior Police
Sergeant II upon the completion of the required length
of service as provided in Section 4.2 and Exhibit A of
this Agreement; the effective date of such increase
shall be on the first day of the month following
completion of such required length of service.

B. Completion (acquisition) of at least ninety (90)
educational and/or training units; or possession of an
Associate of Arts academic degree from an accredited
college with an additional thirty (30) or more
education or training units.

c. Approval of the Police Chief.
Senior Police Sergeant III. Any officer holding the rank of
Police Sergeant in the Santa Ana Police Department,

regardless of duty assignment, who fulfills the requirements
established in this section shall be designated as a Senior

25
Police Sergeant III and shall be paid at a rate set thirty
(30) salary rate ranges (approximately 15%) above his or her
then current base monthly salary step in the Police Sergeant
class. The criteria for such designation shall be as
follows:

A. Completion of nine (9) years of municipal police
experience and be eligible for “EB” step of the base
salary rate range of the Police Sergeant class.

“Eligible” as defined only for Section 6.8(A) means
that a Police Sergeant shall be considered for
advancement from Step “D” or “E” to Senior Police
Sergeant III upon the completion of the required length
of service as provided in Section 4.2 and Exhibit A of
this Agreement; the effective date of such increase
shall be on the first day of the month following
completion of such required length of service.

B. Completion (acquisition) of at least one hundred twenty
(120) educational/training units; or possession of an
Associate of Arts academic degree from an accredited
college with an additional sixty (60) or more
educational/training units.

c. Approval of the Police Chief.

Career Development Program - Non-Sworn. Effective the first
day of the first full month following Council approval of
this Agreement, an incumbent in one of the classes
designated as “non-sworn” covered by this Agreement shall
earn an additional amount as follows:

 

A. Upon attainment of an Associate in Arts Degree and five
(5) years’ experience with the City of Santa Ana, said
employee will be paid at a rate set five (5) salary
rate ranges (approximately 2.5%) above his or her then
current base monthly salary step.

B. Upon attainment of a Bachelor of Arts or Science Degree
and with five (5) years’ experience with the City of
Santa Ana, said employee will be paid at a rate set an
additional (5) salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%
for a total of 10 salary rate ranges (approximately 5%)
above his or her then current base monthly salary step.
If said employee obtains a Bachelor’s Degree without
attaining an Associate in Arts Degree, he or she will
be paid at a rate set ten (10) salary rate ranges
(approximately 5%) above his or her then current base
monthly salary step.

26
ARTICLE VII

7.0 TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

Purpose.

A.

To encourage the employees of the City of Santa Ana to
take college courses and special training courses which
will better enable them to perform their present duties
and prepare them for increased responsibilities.

To provide financial assistance to eligible employees
for education and training.

To establish eligibility requirements, conditions and
procedures whereby such assistance may be provided.

Eligibility.

A.

Applications for tuition reimbursement will be
considered only from full-time, permanent City
employees who have completed probation.

Reimbursement is not authorized for courses for which
the employee is receiving financial assistance from
other sources such as G.I. Bill, scholarships, etc.

Applications will be approved only for courses directly
related to the employee's job or directly related toa
promotional position in the employee's occupational
specialty.

Courses not ostensibly related to the employee's job,
but which are required to qualify for a degree that is
directly related to his or her job may be reimbursable
only after all required occupationally related courses
have been completed.

Prior to receiving tuition reimbursement, employees
must submit documentary proof of having received a
grade of not less than "C" for the course. If objective
ratings are not rendered for a specific course, then a
certificate of successful completion must be submitted.

Approval will be limited to courses given by accredited
colleges and universities, city colleges or adult
education courses under the sponsorship of the various
Boards of Education. Workshops, seminars, conferences
and similar activities not identifiable as a formal
course of instruction within the curriculum of a
recognized educational institution, do not fall within
the purview of this program but may be authorized and
funded by the interested department without

27
coordination with the Personnel Services Department.

When an employee is required by the Police Chief to
attend a particular course or seminar, the expense
shall be borne entirely by the City.

For specifics regarding this Article, please refer to
Santa Ana Police Department Training Bulletin 02-07 -
Scheduling of Training Days and MTravel Time
Compensation.

7.3 Reimbursement.

A.

Reimbursement will be based on the cost of tuition or
registration fees and all required texts and related
material for each course. Additional expenses such as
meals and parking fees are not reimbursable.

Costs for required texts are eligible for one hundred
percent (100%) reimbursement subject to the following
conditions:

1. That a duplicate of the required text(s) was
unavailable for loan from the departmental
libraries prior to the commencement of
coursework;

2. That any textbook(s) purchased by the City shall
be submitted to the employee's respective
departmental library in order that such text (s)
may be made available to all employees.

Tuition or registration costs of one hundred dollars
($100.00) or less are eligible for one hundred percent
(100%) reimbursement. Tuition costs in excess of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) are eligible for seventy-five
percent (75%) reimbursement . Maximum tuition
reimbursement per semester is five hundred dollars
($500.00) with a maximum of $1,500 a year. NOTE: Summer
and winter sessions shall be counted as separate
"semesters" for purposes of the program.

Employees shall be limited, for purposes of tuition
reimbursement, to a maximum of two (2) collegiate level
courses of not more than a total number of units which
is equivalent to six (6) "semester" units per semester.
One (1) "quarter" unit shall equal two-thirds (2/3) of
one (1) "semester" unit.

7.4 Procedures.

A.

An employee who desires to seek tuition reimbursement
under the provisions of this Article must complete an

28
Application for Training and Educational Assistance
form and submit it to the Police Chief.

The Police Chief will recommend approval or disapproval
and forward the application to the Personnel Services
Department. It is advisable that the applicant
accomplish the procedures so far described prior to the
inception of the course or disbursement of personal
funds in order to ascertain the eligibility of the
intended course of instruction for reimbursement under
the provisions of this policy.

Within three months after he/she has completed the
course and received his/her final grade, the employee
must include official verification of his/her final
grade with appropriate receipts for tuition and
textbook costs to the Personnel Services Department.
These will be returned to the employee upon request.
Applications not submitted to the Personnel Services
Department within three months following completion of
the course become void.

Upon receipt of the required documentation, the
Personnel Services Department will determine whether
the completed course of instruction is compatible with
the provisions of Sections 2 and 3 of this Article. If
found to be compatible, the Personnel Services
Department will compute the amount of reimbursement,
authenticate the application and forward it to the
Police Chief.

The Police Chief will then authorize the Finance and
Management Services Department to reimburse the
employee the approved amount out of the budget of the
Police Department.

29
ARTICLE VIII
8.0 OVERTIME

General Policy for Overtime Work. Whenever it shall be
determined to be in the public interest for employees to
perform overtime work, or in an emergency situation, the
City Manager, the Police Chief, or an authorized
representative of the City Manager or Police Chief, may
require an employee to perform overtime work.

 

Definition.
A. Standard Work Period Overtime. Overtime for those

employees assigned to the Standard Work Period shall be
authorized or required time worked in excess of. those
hours assigned to their particular Standard Work Period
Schedule workday or hours in excess of 40 hours per
Work Period.

B. Alternative Work Period Overtime. Pursuant to this
Agreement, employees assigned to the Alternate Work
Period shall earn overtime for authorized or required
time worked in excess of those hours assigned to their
particular Alternative Work Period Schedule workday or
hours in excess of his or her Alternative Work Period
Schedule hours in a consecutive 28 day, 672 hour
period.

Computation of a Workday and Work Period. Paid leave for
holidays, sickness, vacation, and other time off with pay
shall be credited towards the total time worked in computing
a regular workday, and/or a work period, as defined herein.
Work amounting to less than six (6) minutes shall not be
considered time worked. Overtime worked for six (6) or more
minutes shall be calculated in six (6) minute intervals.
Leave without pay shall not be credited towards the total
time worked in computing a regular workday, and/or a work
period, as defined herein.

 

Compensation for Overtime.

A. The preferable method by which overtime shall be
compensated is by monetary payment, at one and one-half
(1 1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay.

B. Should the Police Chief determine that the best
interests of the City will be served thereby, he or his
designee may permit an employee to be compensated for
overtime work by earning paid compensatory time off at
the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the
employee's regular rate of pay. The employee will be
credited with time off at the rate of one and one-half

30
(1 1/2) hours of time for each hour of overtime worked.

This time, hereinafter identified as “comp time” will

be accrued in a comp time bank for each employee. The
hours in this bank shall reflect the converted time
value of each hour worked.

1.

Effective January 1, 2005, employees are limited
to the accumulation of 120 hours of comp time.

Twice during each calendar year, beginning April
15 and ending April 30 and beginning November 15
and ending November 30, each affected employee
who has accrued comp time credits, may elect to
convert up to forty (40) hours of such accrued
time to the cash equivalent thereof, to a maximum
of eighty (80) hours per calendar year.

Use of Comp Time.

1.

When an employee submits a request for time off

using accrued compensatory time, and that
employee has found a qualified replacement, the
time off request will be granted. “Qualified”

means that the replacement officer or employee is
able to fulfill the requirements of the position
to which the requesting officer is assigned.

When an employee submits a request to take time
off using accrued compensatory time and the
officer deployment is above minimum staffing for
that the requested day, then the request will be
granted without further conditions. However, if
the number of officers scheduled to work on the
day(s) of the request is at or below minimum
staffing as defined by the department, the
compensatory time off request will be granted
only if a qualified replacement has volunteered
and committed to work the assignment left open by
the request for time off. The volunteer may
exchange days off with the requesting employee
within the 14-day or 7-day work period, whichever
applies, or may elect to receive overtime
compensation.

Requests for use of compensatory time off during
holidays as defined by the current MOU, must be
submitted in time to be considered during the
monthly scheduling meeting held by bureau and
division commanders for the upcoming month.
These requests will be considered by seniority
and will be granted only if officer deployment is
above minimum staffing.

31
Although it is always preferable for the officer
to find a qualified replacement when requesting
the use of compensatory time off, if provided
sufficient notice of a request for time off, the
department will work with employees to find a
qualified replacement. Sufficient notice and
reasonable period will be defined as follows:

a. Seventy-two (72) hours notice for one (1)
day or less of time off requested.

b. Five (5) calendar days notice for more than
one (1) workday up to one (1) workweek.

c. Fourteen (14) calendar days notice for more
than one (1) week compensatory time off
request.

If an employee has provided sufficient notice of
a compensatory time off request, the department
will work with the employee to find a qualified
replacement in the following manner:

a. The watch commander will maintain a calendar
of time off that has been requested in
accordance with the guidelines listed above.

Qualified employees will be allowed to
volunteer to work these shifts. In the
future, the department may develop, at its
own discretion, an automated schedule that
will contain this information.

b. If an employee volunteers and signs up to
work for another employee who has requested
compensatory time off, that volunteering
employee will be held responsible for
working that full shift without further
reminder. Employees who do not show up to
work, or retract their offer to replace
another officer, may be subject to
disciplinary action and may not be permitted
to volunteer to work in this manner in the
future.

The watch commander shall send out an e-mail
message to all officers requesting a volunteer to
cover the shift by switching days off or working
on overtime.

When a compensatory time off request is made in a
manner that does not comply with this policy, and
granting that request would unduly disrupt the
operations of the department, the department may

32
deny that request.

8.5 Incremental Usage. Time off with pay to compensate for
overtime worked may be taken in increments as small as one-
half (1/2) hour.

8.6 Excess Usage. If compensatory time off is used in excess of
that available, such excess compensatory time off will first
be deducted. from any available vacation benefits and
finally, deducted from the next scheduled wage or salary
payment.

8.7 No Effect on Other Benefits. Overtime work shall not apply
to the earning of employee benefits (retirement, holidays,
vacation accrual, sick leave accrual and employee insurance
benefits), toward the completion of probationary period or
to progression within a salary rate range.

8.8 Overtime Work to be Apportioned. To the extent that he is

reasonably able to do so, the Police Chief shall arrange
work programs to minimize overtime work; necessary overtime
work shall be apportioned among employees of like
classification and assignment.

8.9 Advance Compensation for Overtime. Time off with pay as
compensation for overtime may not be granted or taken in
advance of the overtime work for which the time off
compensates. Before compensatory time off with pay may be
taken, as herein provided, the overtime worked must have
been recorded on official payroll records at or about the
time the overtime work was performed. In the absence of such
recording, no compensatory time off with pay will be
permitted.

 

8.10 Compensation for Overtime: Exclusions. Overtime pay or
comp time shall be allowed an employee for attendance at
conventions, conferences, seminars or the like, as long as
prior authorization is received. Overtime pay or comp time
pay shall be permitted only for attendance which is ordered
on such employee’s normal days off or for time beyond a
normal workday’s duration. Please refer to Santa Ana Police
Department Training Bulletin 02-07 for details.

8.11 Call-Back-Duty.

A. Employees who are on call during their off-duty time
due to their assignment (i.e., Homicide Investigators,
Internal Affairs Sergeants, Crimes Against Persons
Sergeants, etc.) and are called back to work will be
paid for their travel time at the overtime rate from
the time they leave their home until the time they
return home, or until their regularly scheduled shift
begins. Only that period of time devoted to work will

33
8.12

be compensated.

B. Employees who are ordered back to work while off-duty
because of an emergency or other unforeseen event, will
be paid for travel time at the overtime rate from the
time they leave their home until they return home, or
until their regularly scheduled shift begins. Only
that period of time devoted to work will be
compensated.

Cc. Employees who are called at home and offered voluntary
overtime work, and elect to accept the offer, will not
be compensated for travel time in any manner.
Similarly, employees who sign up for voluntary
overtime, or who have advance notice that they will
have to work during their off-duty time on an overtime
basis, will not be compensated for travel time.

Accrued Overtime Paid Upon Promotions or Upon Separation.
Upon an employee's appointment to a position in which
overtime may not be earned or upon an employee's separation
from employment with the City by resignation, retirement,
layoff or otherwise, he or she shall forthwith be
compensated for any overtime accumulated to the time
immediately preceding such promotion or separation.

Court. Appearance. Compensation for court appearance by
personnel covered by this Agreement shall be as follows:

A. For each required court appearance made by an employee
during his or her off-duty time in regard to City
business, employees shall be paid overtime for the
period of time from their arrival at court until they
are released from court or the court session closes for
that day. However, in no case, shall an employee
receive less than two (2) hours overtime for a court
appearance. If court appearances are made both in the
morning and afternoon of a particular day, two (2)
hours overtime will be allowed for each session
attended. If the employee is not released and must
remain available for afternoon court, the employee
shall be paid overtime for all hours the court is in
session that day.

The employee must provide a copy of the subpoena
requiring his or her attendance to initiate payroll
procedures.

B. A subpoenaed employee scheduled to appear in court on
City business during off-duty time may be placed on
stand-by status by the Police Chief or his authorized
representative if the employee can respond to the
court, if called, within 60 minutes of the employee’s

34
notification. In the event such off-duty employee is on
stand-by status during any court session and is not
required to appear in court, such employees shall be
compensated two (2) hours on a straight time basis, for
each court session. Such employee may elect, in lieu
of paid time, two (2) hours of comp time off for
standby time and not appearing in court, with the
approval of the Police Chief. If such off-duty employee
on stand-by actually appears in court, he or she shall
be compensated as provided in Subsection A, supra.

Employees assigned to the 3/12.5 or 7/12.5 Work
Schedule who appear in court during their regularly
scheduled workweek, and as a result do not receive
adequate rest, will be allowed to flex their scheduled
shift start time up to four hours, with the approval of
the employee's immediate supervisor and watch
commander, or immediate supervisor and section
commander. Alternatively, the employee may be allowed
to use up to four hours from his/her "Time Off Bank" or
from compensatory time off at the beginning of their
scheduled shift to ensure adequate rest.

1. An employee whose work shift ends or starts
within thirty minutes of a mandatory court
appearance shall be compensated for those thirty
minutes at an overtime rate.

Employees who are on call for court during off-duty
time, and who are called to testify, will be paid at
the overtime rate of time and a half of their regular
hourly rate, to include actual travel time from their
home to court and back, or until their regularly
scheduled shift begins. Travel time will be limited to
a maximum of one (1) hour each way. Only that period
of time devoted to work will be compensated. Time
spent on personal pursuits or other non-work related
activity will not be compensated.

Those employees who have advance notice of their
required appearance in court, have arranged an
appearance time with the District Attorney's Office, or
who otherwise have advance notice of mandatory court
appearances, will not be compensated for travel time in
any manner.

Employees who appear in court during off-duty hours may
elect to start their normal work shift early as
specified herein.

A subpoenaed employee scheduled to appear in court on

City business during off-duty time and placed on
standby status by the Police Chief or his authorized

35
8.14

8.15

representative will be compensated two (2) hours ona
straight time basis if he or she is not advised of the
cancellation of his or her appearance within five (5)
Court business days of said appearance.

Creation of Association Comp Time Bank.

 

A. Any member of the Association who works overtime, or
has accrued but unused holidays, can designate that he
or she will contribute the value of such time to a bank
for use by members of the Association for the purposes
and subject to the restrictions provided herein.

B. Any member of the Association may receive time off for
the welfare of officers, community service and any
lawful activity of the Association with pay drawn from
the bank described in Subsection A of this Section,
provided that said employee first gains approval for
said use by the executive board of the Association in
the manner specified by its rules as adopted from time
to time, and subject to the approval or disapproval of
the Police Chief consistent with the operational needs
of the Police Department.

Cc. No withdrawal or use of such bank may be made by or on
behalf of an employee ordered to take time off without
pay for discipline imposed by the Police Chief or his
designee.

Declaration of State of Emergency. Emergencies shall be
governed by the provisions of Santa Ana Municipal Code
Section 9-194.

Compensation of Voluntary Contract Overtime. Exclusive of
other provisions of this Article, except Section 8.7 (No
Effect on Other Benefits) supra, Police Officers and Police
Sergeants who voluntarily agree to perform contract security
services at games, parades, dances and similar public events
shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2)
times the employee's regular rate of pay.

The Police Chief shall determine how many off-duty police
officers should serve as security officers at each event.
Police Officers and Sergeants represented by the Association
shall be given first opportunity to volunteer for said off-
duty assignments. If, after a reasonable period of time, an
insufficient number of police officers have volunteered to
work such assignments, the Police Chief may offer the
remaining "openings" to any person(s) he deems capable of
performing the work at whatever straight-time pay rate the
City considers to be appropriate.

36
ARTICLE IX
9.0 HOLIDAYS
Legal holidays observed by full-time permanent = and

probationary employees covered by this Agreement are as
follows:

° January lst - New Year's Day.

° Third (3rd) Monday in January - In observance
of Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday.

° Third (3rd) Monday in February - In observance of
Presidents’ Day.

° Last Monday in May - In commemoration of Memorial
Day.

° July 4th - In observance of Independence Day.

° First (lst) Monday in September - In observance
of Labor Day.

° November 11th - In observance of Veteran's Day.

° Fourth (4th) Thursday in November - In observance
of Thanksgiving Day.

° The Friday immediately following Thanksgiving
Day.

° December 25th - In observance of Christmas Day.

° Last working day before Christmas Day, unless

Christmas falls on a Thursday, in which instance,
the day following Christmas Day shall be observed
in lieu thereof.

° One (1) Floating Holiday - Any workday selected
by the employee with prior permission of the
employee's supervisor.

° Every day proclaimed by the Mayor of the City
as a holiday for City employees.

Any holiday which falls on a Sunday will be observed on the
following Monday. Any holiday which falls on a Saturday will
be observed on the Friday preceding the Holiday.

Full-time, permanent and probationary employees covered by
this agreement shall be entitled to receive 96 hours off
during the calendar year in lieu of the twelve (12) holidays
specified in Section 9.1, supra. Said employee required to
work on a City observed “legal” holiday shall be paid at his
or her straight time rate.

However, if an employee who separated from the service of
the City has taken time off for holidays in advance of the
date or day the holiday actually occurred, he or she must
pay the City the cash value for such used but unearned
holiday time off benefits prior to or at the time of
separation.

37
Cash Option. Employees covered by this Agreement shall be
given an option twice per calendar year to receive cash
compensation computed on a straight time basis in lieu of
eighty (80) hours of their annual holiday leave benefits set
forth in Section 9.2 above. Specifically, employees may
begin to cash out up to 40 hours beginning on April 1, 2005
ending April 30, 2005 and up to 40 hours beginning on
November 1, 2005 ending November 30, 2005. If, however, an
employee did not cash out any of their holiday time in
April, they may cash out up to 80 hours in November.

Such option may be eliminated or modified to the extent it
is construed as overtime under Department of Labor
guidelines implementing provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA).

A newly-appointed employee must actually work at least one
day preceding the day a holiday listed in Section 9.1,
supra, actually occurs in order to receive credit for such
holiday. The employee will then be credited with all
remaining holidays in the year occurring after the
appointment.

An employee separating from the service of the City must
actually work at least one day following the day a holiday
listed in Section 9.1, supra, actually occurs in order to
receive credit for that holiday.

A newly-appointed employee must complete six (6) months of
continuous, full-time service in order to receive credit for
the Floating Holiday listed in Section 9.1 above.

This "time off," as defined in Article X, Section 10.6, may
be taken in increments as small as one half (1/2) hour, with
fractional usage rounded upward to the next higher multiple
of one half (1/2) hour.

Holiday benefits may not be carried over from one calendar
year to the next.

38
ARTICLE X

10.0 VACATION

10.1 Purpose. It is the policy of the City to grant employees
vacation leave in order to provide them with a break in
their regular work schedule, and this purpose will be used
as a guide in the administration of the provisions of this
Article.

10.

Regular Vacation Period.

A.

Full time employees shall be granted regular vacation
at the rate of 80 hours for each of his or her first
and second completed year of service, accrued on a
monthly basis at the rate of 6 2/3 hours for each
completed month of service. Thereafter, all such
employees shall be granted regular vacation at the rate
of 120 hours for each completed year of service,
accrued at the rate of 10 hours for each completed
month of service.

An employee who has completed less than one year's
service during the calendar year shall receive a
proportionate fraction in accordance with the amount of
service to his or her credit during the year; provided,
however, no employee shall be entitled to, or receive
payment for, any vacation until he or she has completed
six (6) months of continuous service.

On or after the first (lst) day of the month following
completion of six (6) months of continuous full-time
service, an employee may be allowed to take all ora
proportionate fraction of his or her earned vacation,
subject to scheduling approval of the employee's
supervisor.

Absence on sick leave for a period in excess of fifteen
(15) consecutive calendar days shall not be considered
as service for vacation accrual purposes.

Computation of Regular Vacation.

1. In computing regular vacation, each municipal
holiday that occurs during the vacation, and that
falls on a day which the employee would have
worked had he or she not been on vacation, shall
be deducted from the computation so that ten (10)
additional hours of regular vacation shall be
allowed to the employee unless departmental
practice provides some other manner of
compensating for municipal holidays. Should an
employee be confined to a hospital for sickness

39
or injury while on authorized vacation, each full
day of such confinement, when confirmed by a
physician's statement and approval of the Police
Chief, may be deducted from the computation of
vacation expended and charged against the
employee's accumulated sick leave.

2. No employee may carry over from one calendar year
to the next, more than the equivalent of two (2)
regular vacation periods from the previous two
(2) years, and vacation not taken beyond that
amount is forfeited. A regular vacation period is
defined as the maximum amount of vacation earned
in a calendar year as provided in Subsection A,
supra.

3. No employee shall have a right to accumulate or
split his or her vacation, but the same may be
allowed or required by the Police Chief.

10.3 Longevity Vacation.

A.

Each permanent employee is granted additional hours of
vacation leave with pay for each computed year of full-
time, continuous city service as set forth in the
following table. This additional vacation shall be
designated longevity vacation.

Completed Hourly Equivalent
Years of Additional Days
6 4
7 8
8 12
9 16
10 20
11 24
12 28
13 32
14 36
15 40
16 48
17 56
18 64
19 72
20 80

No employee becomes eligible for longevity vacation
until completion of the sixth year of continuous
service, and each employee continues to earn the
maximum of 80 hours of longevity vacation for each
completed year of service in excess of 20 years.

40
c. A period of earlier service does not apply toward
longevity vacation accumulation when an employee has
had a break in continuous service, unless the break in
service is concluded by reappointment, as provided in
Section 9-114 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code or by
reemployment from layoff within one (1) year.

D. Leave of absence without pay, as provided in Article
XI, Section 1E (Sick Leave-Extended) and Section 10.8
(Authorized Absence Without Pay - Long Term) herein,
does not constitute a break in continuous service as
used in this section; however, the leave of absence
period shall not be applied toward the accumulation of
longevity vacation. Absence on military leave followed
by reinstatement, as provided in Section 9-143 of the
Santa Ana Municipal Code does not constitute a break in
service, and the period of absence on such military
leave shall be applied toward the accumulation of
longevity vacation.

E. Effective July 1, 2005, employees covered by this
Agreement shall be given an option once per calendar
year, to receive cash compensation computed on a
straight time basis in lieu of up to a total of forty
(40) hours of their longevity vacation leave benefits
set forth in Subsection A above.

Such option may be eliminated or modified at the
discretion of the Department to the extent it is
construed as overtime under Department of Labor
guidelines implementing provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) .

10.4 Limitation on Vacation. With the exception of a retiring
employee, no employee is granted, and no employee shall be
allowed to take, any vacation leave with pay in excess of
400 hours in any one year by any combination of the
vacations granted in this Agreement. Further, no employee
may carry over from one calendar year to the next more than
the equivalent of one longevity vacation period and the
equivalent of one regular vacation period from the previous
two (2) years, and vacation not taken beyond that amount is
forfeited. Therefore, the maximum vacation that an employee
with less than six (6) years service could accumulate is 240
hours and only an employee with more than 20 years of
service could carry over and take the authorized maximum of
400 hours in any one year.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, for any affected employee who
is in jeopardy of losing vacation because of department
staffing needs, the Police Chief may provide for a 30-day
extension beyond the normal cut off date so that such
employee will not lose vacation time.

41
10.5 Excess Usage. If vacation time off is used in excess of that
available, such excess vacation time off will be, first,
deducted from any available compensatory time off accrual;
finally, deducted from the next scheduled wage or salary
payment.

10.6 Time Off Banks. Employee Time Off Banks exist for each
employee in the unit. Time off will be computed on an
annual basis. Separate banks will be maintained for
vacation, holidays, and compensatory time, respectively,
based on existing policies applicable to each. Time off from
each bank may be taken in increments as small as one half
(1/2) hour, with fractional usage rounded upward to the next
higher multiple of one half (1/2) hour.

Each affected employee shall be afforded the opportunity to
submit time off selection(s) and the Police Chief or his
designee shall make every reasonable effort to accommodate
the employee's preference(s). The time at which an employee
shall take his or her leave time shall be determined by the
Police Chief, with due regard for the wishes of the employee
and particular regard for the needs of the service.

NOTE: All other policies and procedures described in Article
VIII, "Overtime", Article IX, "Holidays", and Article xX,
"Vacation" will apply to the Time Off Banks. However, no
employee will be allowed to carry a negative balance in any Time
Off Bank.

42
ARTICLE XI

11.0 OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE

11.1 Sick Leave.

A.

Definition. Except as otherwise provided below, sick
leave shall be deemed to mean absence from duty of an
employee because of non-industrial illness or injury
that prevents the employee from performing the duties
of his or her position, and shall be deemed to include
time in quarantine resulting from non-duty related
exposure to a contagious disease.

Accrual. Each employee shall be entitled to, and shall
earn, eight (8) hours of sick leave for each full
calendar month of service in which he or she is
employed by the City with full pay; provided, however,
any absence on sick leave for a period of time greater
than fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days in any one
(1) calendar month shall not be considered to be
service entitling an employee to earn sick leave as
aforesaid. Subject to the other provisions in this
Article, sick leave shall accrue to the credit of each
employee to the extent that it is not used.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, employees on leave of
absence for service-connected illness or injury who are
covered by the provisions of Labor Code Section 4850,
shall continue to accumulate eight (8) hours of sick
leave for each full calendar month of service for which
he or she is employed by the City with full pay during
said absence for service-connected illness or injury.

Authorized Only When Necessary. Use of sick leave by
City employees shall be authorized as follows:

1. Sick leave is not a right which an employee may
use at his or her discretion, but shall be
allowed only in cases of necessity and actual
sickness or disability, or as authorized in
Subsection J below.

2. With respect to "miscellaneous-member" employees
covered by this Agreement, when such an
employee's absence is caused by an industrial
illness or injury, for which benefits are
required to be provided under the State Workers'
Compensation Insurance and Safety Act, the City
shall pay 100% of salary for the first three (3)
days of such absence and sick leave shall not be
debited.

Limit. The maximum total accumulation of sick leave

B
with pay shall be 1600 hours. Sick leave usage of less
than a full day shall be charged in minimum increments
of one-half (1/2) hour, with fractional usage rounded
upward to the next higher multiple of one-half (1/2).

Extended. The City Manager may grant leave up to six
months without pay to an employee who has exhausted all
of his or her accrued sick leave if the City physician
or a licensed physician designated by the City Manager
indicates that the employee will be sufficiently
recovered to return to his or her employment within a
six (6) months period. Prior to the expiration of the
additional time, the employee may return to his or her
position provided that he or she has a certificate from
one of the above mentioned physicians stating that the
employee is able to perform all the duties of his or
her position without qualification. In addition to the
above, the City Manager may grant a further extension
not to exceed a total of one (1) year without pay.

Extension by Use of Vacation. After an employee's sick

leave has been exhausted, he or she may be granted
permission to take any earned vacation he or she may
have accrued.

Notice. The employee taking sick leave shall notify his
or her immediate supervisor not less than one (1) hour
prior to the time he or she is scheduled to report for
duty. When the absence is more than three (3)
consecutive working days, the employee must present to
the Police Chief a physician's certificate stating
that, in the physician's opinion, the employee could
not report to work because of illness or injury and
that the employee is sufficiently recovered to safely
return to work. Such certificate shall be transmitted
to the chief personnel officer with the report of the
return of the employee to work.

A physician's certificate or other satisfactory written
evidence of actual illness or injury may be required
after an absence of any duration of less than three (3)
days.

Denial. No employee shall be entitled to sick leave
with pay while absent from duty because of sickness or
injury purposely self-inflicted or caused by willful
misconduct; or sickness or disability sustained while
engaged in employment other than employment by the
City, for monetary gain or other compensation, or by
reason of engaging in business or activity for monetary
gain or other compensation.

Excess Usage. If sick leave is used in excess of that

44
due and available to an employee, such excess sick
leave, will first be deducted from any available
compensatory time off benefit; second, from any
available vacation leave benefit; third, from any
available holiday leave benefits; and finally, deducted
from the next scheduled wage or salary payment.

Personal Necessity Leave. Each employee shall be
afforded the opportunity to use up to 48 hours of sick
leave per calendar year, on a non-cumulative basis, as
personal necessity leave. All of this personal
necessity leave may be used to attend to an illness of
a child, parent, or spouse of the employee. As used in
this section, “child” means a biological, foster, or
adopted child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of
a person standing in loco parentis; and “parent” means
a biological, foster, adoptive parent, a stepparent, or
a legal guardian.

Up to three (3) days of this personal necessity leave
may be used: (a) to attend to a serious accident to
members of the employee’s immediate family; (b)
childbirth; (c) to cope with imminent danger to the
employee’s home or other valuable property; or (d) when
the existence of external circumstances beyond the
employee’s control make it impractical for him or her
to report for duty. For the purposes of this section
only, a “day” shall be defined as the number of hours
of work that an employee is required to work according
to his or her specific workday schedule.

Payment for Unused Sick Leave.

Definition. All employees, except for those involved
in disciplinary termination, shall be entitled to
payment under the following provisions:

1. After ten (10) years of cumulative full-time
service with the City, each qualified employee
shall be entitled to payment for one-third (1/3)
of the total sick leave benefit credited to his
or her account upon the effective date of such
termination, not to exceed a maximum limit of 427
hours, at the rate of pay in effect on the date
of such termination.

a. At his or her option, an employee may
convert the above lump sum payment option
into health insurance or long term care
insurance premiums to the extent necessary
to provide the employee and his or her
designated eligible dependents, if any, with
benefits under the health insurance program

45
maintained by the Association. The City’s
obligation to pay such premiums shall be
terminated when the sum of premiums paid
equals one-hundred fifty percent (150%) of
the amount of the lump sum payment that the
employee would have received for unused sick
leave benefits had this option not been
elected, not to exceed a maximum of 640
hours.

After 15 years of cumulative full-time service
with the City, each qualified employee shall be
entitled to credit for two-thirds (2/3) of the
total sick leave benefit credited to his or her
account upon the effective date of such
termination, not to exceed a maximum limit of
1,066 hours, calculated at the rate of pay in
effect on the date of such termination. This
credit shall be applied toward monthly health
insurance premiums or toward long-term care
insurance premiums, beginning on the effective
date of termination. The City’s obligation to pay
such premiums to the Association on behalf of the
employee shall be terminated when the total
credit as described above has been exhausted.

After 20 years of cumulative full-time service
with the City, each qualified employee shall be
entitled to one of two options: (a) payment for
1/3 of the total sick leave benefit credited to
his or her account upon the effective date of
such termination, not to exceed a maximum limit
of 533 hours, at the rate of pay in effect on the
date of such termination, or (b) credit for 2/3
of the total sick leave benefit credited to his
or her account upon the effective date of such
termination, not to exceed a maximum limit of
1,066 hours, as defined in “2" above.

After 25 years of cumulative full-time service
with the City, each qualified employee shall be
entitled to one of two options: (a) payment for
2/3 of the total sick leave benefit credited to
his or her account upon the effective date of
such termination, not to exceed a maximum limit
of 1,066 hours, at the rate of pay in effect on
the date of such termination, or (b) credit for
2/3 of the total sick leave benefit credited to
his or her account upon the effective date of
such termination, not to exceed a maximum limit
of 1,066 hours, as defined in “2" above.

At the employee’s election, payment for unused

46
11.2

sick leave in the above provisions may be
received in either a lump sum of money, or in
equal monthly payments for a period of up to five
(5) years.

6. A lump sum payment shall be made to the
beneficiaries of any eligible employee whose
death occurs while such employee is an active
employee of the City, such payment to be in the
amount of 1/3 of the total sick leave benefit
credited to the employee’s account at the time of
his or her death, and at the rate of pay
effective on the date of death.

7. Upon the death of any retired employee receiving
a benefit under this provision said benefit will
continue to be provided on behalf of said retired
employee to his or her beneficiary.

Bereavement Leave. An employee shall be granted up to
three (3) days leave without loss of pay in case of
death of a member of the employee's immediate family.
For purposes of this Section only, a "day" shall be
defined as the number of hours of work that an employee
is required to work according to his/her specific
workday schedule. Such leave is designated as
bereavement leave. "Immediate family" as used in this
section is limited to:

A. Any relative by blood or marriage who is a member
of the employee's household;

B. A parent, parent-in-law, spouse, child, brother,
sister, grandparent or grandchild of the employee,
regardless of residence;

c. Any other relative of the employee by blood or
marriage where it can be established by the
employee that as a result of such relative's
death, the employee's presence is required.

11.3 Military Leave.

A.

Proof of Orders and Reinstatements. An employee
shall be granted military leave if he or she
furnishes the Chief Personnel Officer satisfactory
proof of his or her orders to report for duty.
Upon return and upon showing proof of actual
service pursuant to such orders, he or she will be
reinstated as provided in Section 9-143 of the
Santa Ana Municipal Code.

 

Temporary. Members of the reserve forces of the

47
11.4

11.5

11.6

11.7

11.8

United States, or the National Guard, granted
temporary leave when ordered to duty, in
accordance with the Military and Veterans Code and
Section 9-144 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code,
will be granted leave with pay not to exceed
thirty (30) calendar days in each calendar year
after one year's service with the City upon
presenting satisfactory proof of orders to and
from such temporary active duties.

Jury and Witness Leave. When an on-duty employee is
called to serve as a juror or a non-party witness in any
court action he or she shall be allowed leave for the time
actually required for such service, without loss of pay.
Each on-duty employee called for such service shall
present to the Police Chief for examination the subpoena
calling him or her to such service and shall pay into the
City Treasury the fees collected for such service, with
the exception of reimbursement for transportation
expenses, if any. Refer to Departmental Order 396 - Jury
Duty for specifics.

Examination Leave. Employees participating in examinations
conducted during their normal working hours for positions
in the competitive service of the City of Santa Ana will
be granted leave with pay for the time actually required,
without loss of any accrued vacation or compensatory time
off benefits.

Unauthorized Absence. Unauthorized absence from duty for
any duration of time may be considered cause for
dismissal. Absence from duty without leave for five (5)
consecutive working days shall be deemed a resignation
from the service; provided, however, if upon return to
duty the person so absenting himself makes an explanation
satisfactory to the Police Chief of the cause of his
absence, the Police Chief may restore him to his position,
with the City Manager's approval.

 

Authorized Absence Without Pay. Absence without pay not to
exceed five (5) consecutive working days, may be
authorized by the Police Chief. Absence without pay not to
exceed fifteen (15) calendar days may be authorized by the
department with the approval of the City Manager. Such
absences may be authorized only if in the judgment of the
Police Chief they serve the best interest of the City.

Authorized Absence Without Pay - Long Term. Upon receipt
of a written request from an employee having permanent
status plus action by the Police Chief recommending
approval of the request, the City Manager may grant a
leave of absence for up to six (6) months.

 

48
11.9

11.10

11.121

An employee returning to duty with the City shall inform
the Police Chief and chief personnel officer of his or her
intention at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the
expiration of the six (6) months period or shorter period
if the full six (6) months is not taken. Upon receipt of
such notice, the Police Chief will take steps necessary to
restore the employee to his or her former position.

Administrative Leave. The City Manager is authorized to
grant, at his discretion, administrative leave with or
without pay for permanent employees if, in his opinion,
such a leave is in the interests of the City.

Industrial Leave.

A. Each "safety member" employee covered by the
provisions of Labor Code Section 4850 who is
compelled to be absent from duty because of an
illness or injury covered by the State of
California Workers' Compensation Insurance and
Safety Act shall, in lieu of temporary disability
compensation payable under the aforementioned Act,
continue to be paid his or her normal salary and
accrue other benefits in accordance with the
provisions of Labor Code Section 4850.

B. Any period of time during which an employee is
required to be absent from his or her position by
reason of an industrial injury or industrial
illness for which he or she is entitled to receive
compensation shall not be considered a break in
continuous service for the purpose of his or her
right to salary adjustment or to the accrual of
vacation and seniority.

Catastrophic Leave Donation. In order to assist employees
otherwise granted leave of absence without pay by the City
Manager because of a catastrophic, non-industrial medical
condition or injury, the City and Association agree to
implement a Catastrophic Leave Donation Program.

A. Guidelines. It shall be understood that all
donations under this procedure are voluntary and
subject to taxation for the recipient.

1. Employees may donate vacation or
compensatory time or one in-lieu holiday to
the eligible employee. In no event shall
sick leave be donated.

2. Employees shall be provided a two-week
period to submit donations. Donations
received after this two-week period shall
not be processed. The two-week period for

49
each case shall be designated by the Police
Chief or his designee as provided herein
below.

Donations shall be for a minimum of two (2)
hours and a maximum of eight (8) hours per
donor. All donations must be made in two-
hour increments, except in lieu holidays
must be for eight (8) hours.

Any authorization of donations not made in
accordance with the procedures outlined in
Section C, subparagraph 2 below, will not be
processed.

All donations shall be irrevocable.

In the event the recipient returns to work
before leave donations have been exhausted,
any balance on the books shall be accrued by
the recipient and designated as sick leave
and may be used pursuant to Article XI,
Sections 11.1A through 11.1K above.

Eligibility. Full-time employees shall be
eligible for catastrophic leave donations if the
following criteria are met:

1.

When it is reasonably foreseeable that all
accrued time on the books, such as sick
leave, compensatory time, vacation, and in
lieu holidays, will be exhausted and the
employee’s illness will continue past the
time when the employee will be on paid
status.

The Police Chief or his designee has
approved a written request for donations
accompanied by a medical statement from the
employee’s attending physician. The
attending physician’s statement must verify
the employee’s need for an extended medical
leave and an estimate of the time the
employee will be unable to work.

Procedure.

1.

Upon receipt of a valid request for
donations from an eligible employee, the
Police Chief or his designee shall post a
notice of the eligible employee’s need for
donations on bulletin boards accessible to
employees. No confidential medical

50
information shall be included in the posted
notice.

2. Employees wishing to donate time to an
eligible employee must sign his or her
authorization of the transfer of such
donated time and provide:

a. His or her name, department name, and
employee number;

b. The number of hours of compensatory or
vacation time of the donation within
the limitations of Section A,
subparagraph 3 above;

c. The name, department, and employee
number of the recipient;

d. A statement indicating that the donor
understands such donation of time is
irrevocable.

3. At the close of the two-week donation

period, the department shall verify that
each donating employee has accrued vacation
and/or comp time balances sufficient to
cover the designated donation.

4. The department shall submit all approved
donation authorizations for an eligible
employee at one time for processing. No

donation authorizations for the eligible
employee will be processed after this
period. However, employees who receive
donations under this procedure and who
exhaust all donated hours may request an
additional donation period subject to the
provisions of Section A, herein.

5. The City shall add the donated time to the
recipient’s sick leave account.

Upon the death of any active employee receiving a
benefit under this provision, the City agrees to
pay any unused Catastrophic Leave Donations
remaining on the books to the surviving
beneficiary.

For those current employees with unused
catastrophic leave on the books, the City agrees
to convert said unused catastrophic leave to sick
leave for use in accordance with the provisions of

51
Article XI, Sections 11.1A through 11.1K above.

52
12.

ARTICLE XII

12.0 EMPLOYEE INSURANCE

During the term of this Agreement the City will contribute
toward the payment of premiums for health, dental and
long-term disability insurance plans administered by the
Association for the benefit of the employees represented
by the Association as follows:

A.

Medical Insurance. During the term of this
Agreement, the City will contribute the following
amounts to the Santa Ana Police Officers
Association Medical Insurance Trust Fund for each
affected employee enrolled in medical insurance
plans provided by the Association for its
bargaining unit members and their eligible
dependents:

Effective 7-1-04 - 6-30-05: $648/month per
employee.
Effective 7-1-05 - 6-30-06: $710 /month per
employee.

Effective for 7-1-06: The City and Association
agree to reopen this provision of the Agreement to
discuss rates.

Effective for 7-1-07: The City and Association
agree to reopen this provision of the Agreement to
discuss rates. Any contributions necessary to
maintain benefits under said medical plans in
excess of the amounts referenced shall be borne
entirely by the Association and/or the enrollees.

Dental Insurance. During the term of this
Agreement, the City will contribute the following
amounts to the Santa Ana Police Officers
Association Medical Insurance Trust Fund for each
affected employee enrolled in dental insurance
plans provided by the Association for its
bargaining unit members and their eligible
dependents:

Effective 7-1-04 - 12-31-05: $70/month per
employee.

Effective 1-1-06: $80/mo per employee.
Effective for 1-1-07: The City and Association

agree to reopen this provision of the Agreement to
discuss rates.

53
12.

Any contributions necessary to maintain benefits
under said dental plans in excess of these amounts
per month shall be borne entirely by the
Association and/or the enrollees.

Long-Term Disability (L.T.D.) Insurance. The
City shall continue to contribute to the Santa Ana
Police Officer Medical Insurance Trust Fund an
amount toward the payment of premiums for each
employee who is enrolled in the long-term
disability insurance plan provided by the
Association for employees covered by this
Agreement in accordance with the _ following
schedule:

 

1. With respect to sworn, "safety-member"
police personnel, up to a maximum of sixty-
eight dollars ($68.00) per month per
enrollee.

2. With respect to non-sworn, "miscellaneous-
member" personnel, up to a maximum of sixty-
four dollars ($64.00) per month per
enrollee.

Any contribution necessary to maintain benefits
under such long-term disability insurance plan
provided by the Association for covered employees
in excess of the amounts set forth as above shall
be borne by the Association and/or the enrollees.

Life Insurance. The City shall maintain in effect
for the term of this Agreement its existing life
insurance plan for employees covered by this
Agreement on the same basis as said plan was
offered to employees as of December 31, 1988
except the term life insurance coverage for each
affected employee will be in the amount of twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000), plus twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000) accidental death and
dismemberment (AD + D) coverage, at no cost to the
employee.

Retiree Health Insurance Plan. Members retiring on or
after July 1, 1997, will be provided health insurance
premium reduction assistance.

All bargaining unit employees and the Association shall
hold the City harmless, defend and indemnify the City for
any claims regarding the administration of, or the payment
of, claims under any Association designed retiree health
insurance benefit plan.

54
12.

Employees on unpaid leave of more than fifteen (15)
calendar days shall not receive the City's contribution
toward any insurance coverage. The Police Department will
notify the Association of all employees on unpaid leave or
who separate from City employment within three (3) working
days. The City will continue the payment of contribution
for insurance coverage until the end of the month in which
the Association had received notice from the City of the
employee's separation from employment.

55
13.

13.

ARTICLE XIIT
13.0 RETIREMENT

General. The City shall continue to make contributions to
the California Public Employees' Retirement System
(CalPERS) in accordance with its contract with CalPERS for
employees covered by said contract as amended on January
1, 1990 and to be amended to provide for the 3% at 50
benefit effective July 1, 2001.

Deferred Retirement. The City shall continue to make
payment to CalPERS on behalf of each employee covered by
this Agreement in accordance with the following schedule:

A. With respect to “safety-member” employees, the City
shall pay an amount equal to nine-ninths (9/9ths) of
his or her individual employee retirement contribution.

B. With respect to “miscellaneous-member” employees
covered by this Agreement, the City shall pay an amount
equal to seven-sevenths (7/7ths) of his or her
individual employee retirement contribution.

Such payments shall be credited to the individual
employee’s CalPERS account.

Such payments are not increases in base salary and no
salary rate range applicable to any of the employees
covered by this Agreement shall be changed or deemed to
have been changed by reason thereof. As a result, the
City will not treat these payments as ordinary income
and thus, will not withhold federal or state income tax
from said payments. The City has received an opinion
or ruling from the Internal Revenue Service confirming
that these payments are deferred compensation, not
ordinary income.

In the event that the City receives a subsequent
ruling from the Internal Revenue Service that such
payments are ordinary income of the employees instead
of deferred compensation, the City's obligation to make
such payments shall discontinue and in place thereof
the base salary of each affected employee shall
forthwith be increased by eighteen (18) salary rate
ranges (9.0%) for "safety-member" and fourteen (14)
salary rate ranges (7.0%) for all "miscellaneous-
member" employees covered by this Agreement.

For the purpose of reporting an employee’s compensation

to CalPERS, the City shall include these payments as if
they were a part of the employee’s base salary.

56
13.

13.

13.

13.

CalPERS Fourth Level of 1959 Survivors Benefits. Effective
November 7, 2002, the City will provide CalPERS fourth
level of 1959 Survivors Benefit to all eligible employees
in the unit.

CalPERS  Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2 Death
Benefit. Effective July 5, 2000, the City shall provide
the CalPERS Pre-Retirement Optional Settlement 2 Death
Benefit to all employees covered by this Agreement.

3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit for Safety Members.
The City agrees to amend its contract with CalPERS to
provide Safety employees represented by this bargaining
unit with the 3% at 50 Service Retirement benefit
effective July 1, 2001.

Payment of 3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit. The
actual cost for the benefit shall be determined upon
receipt of the annual actuarial valuation setting forth
employer rates for the 2001-02 fiscal year and every
subsequent year thereafter. In order to provide this
benefit to its current safety members, the City and
Association agree that eligible employees will pay 50% of
the total additional normal cost to provide this benefit,
not to exceed 1.42% of safety payroll, at such time as the
City of Santa Ana incurs such cost.

Yearly Actuarial Valuation Fluctuations. CalPERS provides
the City with a yearly actuarial valuation informing it of
its new employer contribution rate to be in effect July
1%* of each year. The City and Association agree that the
City’s employer contribution rate will fluctuate from year
to year based on the investment returns earned by the
retirement system. The City agrees that current eligible
safety employees paying to receive this benefit should
also benefit from this yearly fluctuation in the City’s
annual actuarial valuation. As such, current eligible
Safety employees will contribute 50% of any yearly City
employer contribution rate to a maximum of 1.42%. Due to
excessive employer contribution rates, effective July 1,
2004 and during the term of this Agreement, the agreed
upon employer contribution rate shall be 1.42%.

 

Military Service Credit as Public Service. Effective
January 2, 2001, Safety employees, and April 5, 2002,
Miscellaneous employees, respectively, may elect to
purchase up to four (4) years of service credit for any
continuous active military or merchant marine service
prior to employment. The employee must contribute an
amount equal to the contribution for current and prior
service that the employee and the employer would have made
with respect to that period of service. The City agrees
that, as soon as practicable following Council approval of

 

57
13.

13.

this Agreement, and amendment to the CalPERS contract,
employees who elect to purchase service credit may do so
on a “pre-tax” basis.

Retirement Reopener. Effective for July 1, 2006, the City
and Association agree to reopen Article XIII Retirement,
for the purpose of discussing the feasibility of an
enhanced retirement formula for Local Miscellaneous
Members. Additionally, at the same time, the City and
Association agree to reopen this Agreement for the purpose
of discussing the feasibility of providing “safety
retirement” to Detention Officers, Senior Detention
Officers, and Detention Supervisors.

Credit for Unused Sick Leave. Effective January 1, 2002,
a non-sworn employee covered by this Agreement can have
unused accumulated sick leave at the time of retirement
converted to additional service credit, pursuant to
regulations prescribed by PERS. The City must report only
those hours of unused sick leave that were accrued by the
employee during the normal course of employment. This
section applies to members whose effective date of
retirement is within four (4) months of separation from
employment . Effective July 1, 2007, the provisions of
this section will also apply to sworn employees covered by
this Agreement .

58
ARTICLE XIV

14.0 RELEASE TIME FOR ASSOCIATION REPRESENTATIVE

During the term of this Agreement, the City agrees to grant full-
time release from duty for one (1) Association representative for
the conduct of Association affairs subject to the following:

14.1

14.2

14.3

14.4

The Association shall reimburse the City for one hundred
percent (100%) of salary (including any salary additives,
such as career incentive pay) and benefit costs. Such
reimbursement may be from the bank established pursuant to
Section 8.15 of Article VIII of this Agreement.

The Association shall provide an insurance policy or
policies, or certificate of such insurance, naming the
City of Santa Ana, its officers, employees and agents as
insured or additional insured, which provides coverage
against liability for any and all claims and/or suits for
damages or injuries to persons or property resulting from
or arising out of any act or omission of said Association
representative. Said policy or policies of insurance shall
provide coverage for both bodily injury and property
damage in not less than the following minimum amounts: One
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit or
its equivalent. Said policy or policies shall also contain
a provision that no termination, cancellation or change of
coverage of insured or additional insured shall be
effective until thirty (30) days notice thereof has been
given in writing to the City of Santa Ana.

The Association shall provide the City of Santa Ana with
an insurance certificate from a workers! compensation
insurance carrier certifying that it carries primary
workers' compensation insurance on behalf of said
Association representative and the policy shall not be
cancelled nor the coverage reduced except upon ten (10)
days' prior notice to the City of Santa Ana.

The Association shall indemnify and save harmless the City
of Santa Ana, its officers and employees, from and against
any and all damage to property or injuries to or death of
any person or persons, including property and employees or
agents of the City of Santa Ana, and shall defend,
indemnify and save harmless the City of Santa Ana, its
officers and employees, from any and all claims, demands,
suits, actions or proceedings of any kind or nature,
including, but not by way of limitation, workers'
compensation claims, resulting from or arising out of the
negligent acts, errors, or omissions, or arising out of

the intentional or malicious acts of Association's
representative.

59
14.

14.

The Association and the City of Santa Ana agree that the
Association's representative will not be required to carry
out any peace officer's duties during such time that the
Association's representative is on such full-time release
from duty. The Association's representative will be
required to comply with the Rules and Regulations of the
Santa Ana Police Department as they apply to off-duty
employees, except such representative will not be required
to report for duty for any purpose.

Upon return to duty from such full-time release, the
Association's representative shall be restored to the same
position without loss of any benefits as he or she would
have occupied or accrued if there had been no disruption
in duty status.

The Association agrees that since the Association
representative does not report for duty or account to the
City for his or her sick leave or vacation time, that
vacation and sick leave accruals shall be treated as
follows:

A. The Association representative shall accrue eight
(8) hours of sick leave each month until the
accrued sick leave total reaches a maximum of 1600

hours.
B. Vacation shall be accrued consistent with existing
POA MOU provisions. The Association

representative may not carry over from one (1)
calendar year to the next more than the equivalent
of one (1) longevity vacation period and the
equivalent of one (1) regular vacation period from
the previous two (2) years. Regular vacation in
excess of that accrued during the previous two (2)
year period will be forfeited.

c. The Association representative may not donate
his/her accrued vacation or holiday time.

60
15.

ARTICLE XV

15.0 SAFETY
The City and the employees of the City agree to comply
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, and

City of Santa Ana regulations, which relate to health and
safety.

61
16.

ARTICLE XVI
16.0 RESIDENCY

To the extent possible, the City shall perform any and all
acts necessary to remove limitations upon where employees
reside who are covered by this Agreement.

At the discretion of the Police Chief, selected special
duty assignments may be designated as rapid response
assignments. In those instances, the Police Chief may
apply specific residency requirements upon members
assigned to those positions.

62
17.

17.

ARTICLE XVII

17.0 DISCIPLINE

Any permanent employee covered by this Agreement may only
be disciplined in accordance with the standards and
procedures and subject to all rights of appeal set forth
in Santa Ana Municipal Code Sections 9-9, 9-10, 9-118.1,

et

seq. Any probationary employee covered by this

Agreement may be disciplined in accordance with the
standards and procedures set forth in Santa Ana Municipal
Code Sections 9-90, 9-91, 9-118, and subject to review in
accordance with the grievance review procedure contained
in this Agreement.

In addition, a new section shall be added to the Municipal
Code to provide as follows:

A.

In the event an employee is ordered to absent
himself from the job based on probable cause and
it is subsequently determined by the Police Chief,
the City Manager, Personnel Board or a court of
competent jurisdiction, that cause did not exist
for the ordered absence, the employee shall have
restored to him any paid leaves of absence against
which such absence may have been charged, and he
shall be granted a retroactive leave of absence
with pay for the time during which he was
prohibited from performing the duties of his
position, less any compensation paid to him by the
City during such ordered absence unless such
employee waives his/her rights to retroactive pay.

In the event an employee is reduced, suspended
and/or discharged, and upon appeal the City
Manager, Personnel Board or a court of competent
jurisdiction does not sustain such reduction,
suspension, and/or discharge, the employee shall
be entitled to his base rate or salary including
all additives, vacation, and sick leave as if such
unsustained reduction, suspension, or discharge
had not been invoked. However, in no event shall
an employee be entitled to any salary or credit
for vacation and sick leave for any period of time
covered by a suspension sustained on appeal or for
any period of time waived by the employee as a
condition to the granting of a continuance of any
hearing on appeal.

If, during an absence for which an employee is
paid pursuant to this Section, he earned any money
which he would not have earned had he continued to
perform the duties of his position, such sum shall

63
be deducted from the salary otherwise payable to
him pursuant to this Section.

64
18.

18.

ARTICLE XVIII
18.0 GRIEVANCE REVIEW PROCEDURE

Definition of Grievance. A grievance shall be defined as
a timely complaint by an employee or group of employees or
the Association concerning the interpretation or
application of specific provisions of this Agreement, or
of the rules and regulations governing personnel practices
or working conditions of the City; except, however, those
matters specifically assigned to the jurisdiction of the
City Personnel Board by provision of the City Charter and
the Civil Service Rules and Regulations.

No employee shall suffer any reprisal because of filing or
processing of a grievance or participating in the
Grievance Review Procedure.

Informal Process.

A. An employee must first attempt to resolve the
grievance on an informal basis through discussion
with his or her immediate supervisor without undue
delay, but in no case, beyond a period of ten (10)
calendar days after the occurrence of the alleged
incident giving rise to the grievance, or when the
grievant knew or should have reasonably become
aware of the facts giving rise to the grievance.

If the employee’s grievance is directed against the
actions of his or her immediate supervisor, the
employee may initiate his or her grievance with
his or her Division Commander. In such cases, the
employee shall file his or her grievance directly
with the Division Commander within ten (10
calendar days of the event. Response time lines
will continue as designated for Division Commander
and above. If the grievance is directed toward
the Division Commander, the employee may file
directly with the Bureau Commander.

B. The Supervisor will respond to the grievance
within seven (7) calendar days of receiving the
grievance.

Cc. If the grievance is not resolved at the immediate

supervisor level, the employee, within ten (10
calendar days of the supervisor’s response, will
attempt to resolve the grievance on an informal
basis through discussion with his or her Division
Commander. The Division Commander will respond to
the grievance within seven (7) calendar days of
receiving the employee grievance.

65
18

+3

Formal

A.

Every effort shall be made to find an acceptable
solution to the grievance through this informal
process.

If the grievance is not resolved at the informal
level, the employee shall then set forth the
grievance in writing, indicate the nature of the
action desired, sign it, and submit it in
duplicate to his or her Bureau Commander. At this
point, the grievance review process becomes
formal . Should the grievant fail to file a
written grievance, and in the manner specified
above, within ten (10) calendar days after
receiving the response from his or her Bureau
Commander, the grievance shall be barred and
waived.

Process.

If the grievance is not resolved through the
informal process, and a written grievance is filed
within the time limits set forth above, the
grievant’s immediate supervisor and Division
Commander will add their comments and any
justification they consider proper, sign it, and
forward it to their Bureau Commander without undue
delay, or in no case, more than seven (7) calendar
days after receiving the formal grievance. A copy
shall be provided to the employee.

The Bureau Commander, after study of the case,
shall attach his or her decision and reasons
therefore, and return them to the employee within
seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the
written grievance.

If no satisfactory settlement has been reached at
the division level, the employee may, within seven
(7) calendar days after receipt of the Bureau
Commander’s decision may, in writing, request a
meeting with the Police Chief to pursue the
employee’s grievance. Failure of the grievant to
take this action will constitute a waiver and bar
to the grievance, and the grievance will be
considered settled on the basis of the Bureau
Commander’s response.

If the grievant files a written grievance to the
Police Chief in the matter and within the time
limits specified in “C” above, then a conference
shall be held at the request of the employee or
the Police Chief.

66
The Police Chief shall inform the employee of his
action within fourteen (14) calendar days of the
filing of the written grievance with the Police
Chief or the date the conference is held between
the employee and the Police Chief.

If no satisfactory settlement has been reached at
the departmental level, the employee may, within
seven (7) calendar days after being informed by
the Police Chief of his decision on the matter,
and the reasons thereof, submit the grievance in
writing to the City Manager, or his duly
authorized representative, for determination.
Failure of the grievant to take this action will
constitute a waiver and bar to the grievance, and
the grievance will be considered settled on the
basis of the Police Chief's response.

The City Manager, or his representative, after
careful review, shall render a final decision on
the merits of the grievance, in writing, and
return it to the grievant within twenty-one (21)
calendar days after receiving the grievance. A
copy of the written grievance to the City Manager,
and of the City Manager’s decision, shall be filed
in the Personnel Records of the department and the
grievant’s personnel jacket maintained in the
Personnel Services Department.

After the procedure set forth in this Article has
been exhausted, the grievant, the Association, and
the City shall have all rights and remedies to
pursue said grievance under the law.

67
19.

19.

ARTICLE XIX
19.0 DUES DEDUCTION AND INDEMNIFICATION

Dues Deduction. The City shall deduct dues, on a regular
basis, from the pay of all employees recognized to be
represented by the Association, who voluntarily authorize
such deduction, in writing, on a form to be provided for
this purpose by the City. The City shall remit such funds
to the Association within thirty (30) days following their
deduction.

Indemnification. The Association agrees to hold the City
harmless and indemnify the City against any claims, causes
of actions, or lawsuits instituted by a member or members
of the Association arising out of the deductions or
transmittal or such funds to the Association, except the
intentional failure of the City to transmit, to the
Association, monies deducted from the employees pursuant
to this Article.

68
20.

ARTICLE XX
20.0 CITY RIGHTS

The City reserves, retains, and is vested with, solely and
exclusively, all rights of Management which have not been
expressly abridged by specific provision of this Agreement
or by law to manage the City, as such rights existed prior
to the execution of this Agreement. The sole and exclusive
rights of Management, as they are not abridged by this
Agreement or by law, shall include but not be limited to
the following rights:

A. To manage the City generally and to determine the
issues of policy.

B. To determine the existence or non-existence of
facts which are the basis of the Management
decision.

c. To determine the necessity of organization of any

service or activity conducted by the City and
expand or diminish services.

D. To determine the nature, manner, means, and
technology, and extent of services to be provided
to the public.

E. To determine methods of financing.

F. To determine types of equipment or technology to
be used.

G. To determine and/or change the facilities,

methods, technology, means, and size of the work
force by which the City operations are to be
conducted.

H. To determine and change the number of locations,
relocations, and types of operations, processes,
and materials to be used in carrying out ali City
functions including, but not limited to, the right
to contract for or subcontract any work or
operation of the City.

I. To assign work to and schedule employees in
accordance with requirements as determined by the
City, and to establish and change work schedules
and assignments.

J. To relieve employees from duties for lack of work

or similar non-disciplinary reason, subject to the
provisions of the City Charter, Municipal Code,

69
20.

federal and state law and this Agreement.

K. To establish and modify productivity and
performance programs and standards.

L. To discharge, suspend, demote, or otherwise
discipline employees for proper cause in
accordance with the provisions and procedures set
forth in the City Charter and Santa Ana Municipal

Code.

M. To determine job classifications and to reclassify
employees.

N. To hire, transfer, promote, and demote employees

for non-disciplinary reasons in accordance with
this Agreement.

oO. To determine policies, procedures, and standards
for selection, training, and promotion of
employees.

P. To establish employee performance standards

including, but not limited to, quality and
quantity standards and to require compliance
therewith.

Q. To maintain order and efficiency in its facilities
and operations.

R. To establish and promulgate and/or modify rules
and regulations to maintain order and safety in
the City which are not in contravention with this
Agreement.

s. To take any and all necessary action to carry out
the mission of the City in emergencies.

Except in emergencies, or where the City is required to
make changes in its operations because of the requirements
of law, whenever the contemplated exercise of Management's
rights shall impact on a significant number of employees
of the bargaining unit, the City agrees to meet and confer
in good faith with representatives of the Association
regarding the impact of the contemplated exercise of such
rights prior to exercising such rights, unless the matter
of the exercise of such rights is provided for in the
Agreement .

The City and Association agree that upon the expiration of
this contract and during the good faith negotiations for a
subsequent contract, salary and benefits shall continue at
the then current rate.

70
21.

21.

ARTICLE XXI
21.0 STRIKES AND WORK STOPPAGES
Prohibited Conduct.

A. The Association, its officers, agents,
representatives, and/or members agree that during
the term of this Agreement, they will not cause or
condone any unlawful strike, walkout, slowdown,
sick-out or any other unlawful job action by
withholding or refusing to perform services.

B. Any employee who participates in any conduct
prohibited in Subsection A above shall be subject
to suspension, demotion or dismissal. by the
appointing authority.

Cc. In addition to any other lawful remedies or
disciplinary actions available to the City, if the
Association fails, in good faith, to perform all
responsibilities listed below in Section 21.2,
Association Responsibility, the City may suspend
any and all rights and privileges, accorded to the
Association in this Agreement, including but not
limited to suspension of the Grievance Review
Procedure and dues deduction.

Association Responsibility. In the event that the

Association, its officers, agents, representatives, or
members engage in any of the conduct prohibited in Section
21.1A of this Article, Prohibited Conduct, the Association
shall immediately instruct any persons engaging in such
conduct that their conduct is in violation of this
Agreement and unlawful, and they must immediately cease
engaging in conduct prohibited in said Section 21.1A, and
return to work.

71
22.

ARTICLE XXII
22.0 LAYOFFS

All layoffs within the competitive service
occasioned by abolishment of a position, the
combination of duties of two (2) or more
positions, or the reduction in numbers of
employees in a given class, shall be governed by
seniority in the class. Reemployment shall be in
reverse order of layoff.

Any promotional probationary employee laid off
under these procedures, who held permanent status
in a lower class shall retain seniority rights in
the previously held classification provided that
it is still listed in the City's current basic
classification and compensation plan.

Any permanent, full-time employee laid off under
the above provisions may request a demotion to a
position in a lower class provided he/she meets
reasonably related qualifications required for
placement in the class and the position is vacant.

In lieu of layoff, an employee may elect to work
in a lower level classification, in which he or
she has served, providing that classification is
within the same job family/career ladder. In that
event, the employee’s length of service in the next
lower classification will be added to his or her
length of service in the affected classification,
and said combined seniority shall be used to bump
down into the next lower classification. This
method of combining seniority shall be applied to
subsequent lower classifications.

For positions that were advertised in the Police
Department as “open and promotional” or
“promotional only” which are open to Police
Department employees only, there will be created a
“job ladder” such that those employees in positions
to be eliminated through layoff shall be entitled
to return to the POA job classification in the
Police Department from which they promoted,
“pumping” any employee in that job class with less
cumulative years of service in that job class than
the bumping employee had in that job class prior
to promotion.

Notice of Service. On request, a laid off

employee shall receive a statement certifying that
his/her services have been satisfactory. Layoff

7?
shall not be used in lieu of a disciplinary
dismissal.

73
23.

23.

ARTICLE XXIII
23.0 SOLE AND ENTIRE AGREEMENT

It is the intent of the parties hereto that the provisions
of this Agreement shall supersede all prior agreements and
memoranda of agreement, or memoranda of understanding, or
contrary salary and/or personnel rules and regulations or
administrative codes, provisions of the City, oral and
written, expressed or implied, between the parties, and
shall govern the entire relationship and shall be the sole
source of any and all rights which may be asserted
hereunder. This Agreement is not intended to conflict with
federal or state law or the City Charter.

The City will continue to administer its employee
relations and its personnel policies and procedures in
accordance with duly-adopted ordinances and resolutions,
and the affected employees will continue to be governed
thereby during the term of this Agreement.

74
24.

24.

ARTICLE XXIV

WAIVER OF BARGAINING DURING THE TERM OF THIS AGREEMENT

During the term of this Agreement, the parties mutually
agree that they will not seek to negotiate or bargain with
regard to wages, hours, and terms and conditions of
employment, whether or not covered by the Agreement or in
the negotiations leading thereto, unless required by
specific provisions of this Agreement, and irrespective of
whether or not such matters were discussed or were even
within the contemplation of the parties hereto during the
negotiations leading to this Agreement. Regardless of the
waiver contained in this Article, the parties may,
however, by mutual agreement, in writing, agree to meet
and confer about any matter during the term of this
Agreement.

75
25.

ARTICLE XXV
25.0 SEPARABILITY PROVISION

Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be
inoperative, void, or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Agreement shall
remain in full force and effect for the duration of this
Agreement, provided that if any such affected provisions
invalidate or void any benefits of employees covered
hereunder, the parties shall forthwith commence
negotiations to replace the invalidated benefits with
benefits of comparable value.

76
ARTICLE XXVI
26.0 TERM OF AGREEMENT

26.1 The term of this Agreement shall be from July 1, 2004
through June 30, 2008.

77
ARTICLE XXVII
27.0 RATIFICATION AND EXECUTION

27.1 The City and the Association have reached an understanding
as to certain recommendations to be made to the City Council
for the City of Santa Ana and have agreed that the parties
hereto will jointly urge said Council to adopt a new wage
and salary resolution which will provide for the changes
contained in said joint recommendations. The City and the
Association acknowledge that this Agreement shall not be in
full force and effect until ratified by the membership of
the Association and adopted by the City Council of the City
of Santa Ana. Subject to the foregoing, this Agreement is
hereby executed by the authorized representatives of the
City and the Association and entered into this 4 day of
October, 2004.

CITY OF SANTA ANA, a
Municipal Corporation of
the State of California

Dated: 71 na of
Dated: Qo0tT By: Sah W. Ray

CITY MANAGER

~ . A
Dated: 1 ‘Loos By: Voss Ss,
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS MGR.

PERSONNEL SERVICES

 

     
   

ATTEST:

At 4-€ 6 y
CLERK QF \THE .COUN

Py NG
ye SN

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

ITY/ ATTORNEY

718
This Agreement has been ratified by the membership of the Santa Ana
Police Officers Association.

SANTA ANA POLICE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

2
Dated: 1 | LA} 9S By:
PRESIDENT

    
    
 

ESQ.

DANIEL MORENO

E PEREZ

hn ble

RTINO GALLO

 

LISA ZANCA

notty SWAIN

72
EXHIBIT A
BASIC SALARY AND WAGE SCHEDULE

The City’s basic salary and wage schedule provides for a number of ranges of pay
rates (salary rate ranges) each comprised of five pay steps or rates. The salary
rate ranges are identified by a three-digit number and the steps by the letters A
to EB inclusive. For non-management employees, the purpose of each step and the
length of service required for advancement within the rate range are summarized
as follows:

A Step - Normal beginning pay rate.

B Step - Automatic Increase - After 6 months service in next
lower step. Also optional hiring rate.

c Step - Automatic Increase - After 12 months service in next
lower step. Also maximum hiring rate.

D Step - Automatic Increase - After 12 months service in next
lower step.

E Step - Merit Rate - After 18 months service in next lower step.

In the following salary schedule matrix, each salary range is identified by a
three-digit number. The first two digits are listed in the first vertical column
on the left and the third digit is listed horizontally across the top and
identifies the appropriate column. This three-digit range number locates “A”
step of the range steps B, C, D and E are found in the column directly below “A”
step. For example, “A” step of Range No. 501 is found to be $2402 by moving down
the left column (Range No.) to the number 40 (the first two digits of the Range
No.), then horizontally to column 1 (the third digit of the Range No.). The “A”
step of $2402 has the remaining steps shown directly below, thus the full, five-
step range is 2402-2523-2650-2782-2921. In the same manner, Range No. 555 is
found to be 3129-3285-3449-3622-3803.

SALARY SCHEDULE MATRIX

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
36 1209 1215 1221 1227 1233 1239 1245 1251 1258 1264
37 1269 1275 1281 1288 1294 1301 1307 1314 41320 1327
38 1332 1338 1345 1352 1358 1365 1372 1379 1386 1393
39 1399 1405 1413 1420 1427 1434 1441 1448 1455 1463
40 1469 1476 1483 1491 1498 1506 1513 1521 1528 1536
41 1542 1549 1557 1565 1573 1580 1588 1596 1604 1612
42 1619 1627 1635 1643 1651 1659 1668 1676 1684 1693
43 1700 1708 1717 #1725 41734 #41742 #+1751 1760 1769 1778
44 1785 1793 1802 1811 1820 1830 1839 1848 1857 1866
45 1874 1883 1892 1902 1911 1921 1930 1940 1950 1960
46 1968 1977. 1987 1997 2007 2017 2027 2037 2048 2058
47 2066 2076 2086 2097 2107 2118 2128 2139 2150 2160
48 2169 2179 2190 2201 2212 2223 2234 2246 2257 2268
49 2277 2288 2299 2311 2322 2334 2346 2357 2369 2381
50 2391 2402 2414 2427 2439 2451 2463 2475 2488 2500
51 2511 2523 2536 2548 2561 2574 2587 2600 2613 2626
52 2637 2650 2663 2676 2690 2703 2717 2730 2744 2758
53 2769 2782 2796 2810 2824 2838 2853 2867 2881 2896
54 2907 2921 2936 2950 2965 2980 2995 3010 3025 3040
55 3052 3067 3082 3098 3113 3129 3144 3160 3176 3192
56 3205 3221 3237 3253 3269 3285 3302 3318 3335 3352
57 3365 3381 3398 3415 3432 3449 3467 3484 3501 3519
58 3533 3550 3568 3586 3604 3622 3640 3658 3676 3695
59 3710 3728 3747 3765 3784 3803 3822 3841 3861 3880
60 3896 3915 3935 3954 3974 3994 4014 4034 4054 4074
61 4091 4111 4132 4152 4173 4194 4215 4236 4257 4278
62 4296 4317 4339 4360 4382 4404 4426 4448 4470 4493
63 4511 4533 4556 4579 4601 4624 4648 4671 4694 4718
64 4741 4764 4787 4810 4834 4858 4882 4906 4930 4954
65 4978 5002 5026 5051 5076 5101 5126 5151 5176 5201
66 5226 5252 5278 5304 5330 5356 5382 5408 5434 5461

80
5488
5762
6050
6353
6670
7005
7355
7723
8109
8515
8941
9388
9857
10350
10868
11411
11982
12581

5515
5790
6080
6384
6702
7039
7391
7761
8149
8557
8985
9434
9906
10401
10922
11468
12041
12643

5542
5818
6110
6415
6735
7073
7427
7799
8189
8599
9029
9482
9955
10453
10976
11525
12102
12707

5569
5847
6140
6446
6768
7107
7463
7837
8229
8641
9073
9529
10005
10506
11031
11583
12162
12770

81

5596
5876
6170
6478
6801
7141
7499
7875
8269
8683
9117
9577
10055
10558
11086
11640
12223
12834

5623
5905
6200
6510
6835
7176
7535
7913
8309
8725
9161
9625
10105
10611
11142
11699
12284
12898

5678
5963
6260
6574
6903
7247
7609
7989
8389
8809
9250
9721
10207
10717
11254
11816
12407
13027

5734
6021
6322
6638
6971
7319
7685
8069
8473
8897
9342
9819
10309
10825
11366
11934
12532
13158
EXHIBIT B
ASSIGNMENT OF CLASSES REPRESENTED BY THE
SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION TO
SALARY RATE RANGES FOR
THE 48 MONTH PERIOD JULY 1, 2004 THROUGH JUNE 30, 2008

SALARY RATE RANGES EFFECTIVE:

7-1-04
CLASS TITLE NO. (MIN_- MAX)
CalPERS SAFETY MEMBER CLASSES
Police Officer 644 $4834-5876
Police Sergeant 687 $5963-7247

CalPERS MISCELLANEOUS MEMBER CLASSES

Animal Service Officer I 582 $3568-4339
Animal Service Officer II 612 $4132-5026

Background Investigator 597 $3841-4671
Communications Services Ofcr 577 $3484-4236
Crime Research Analyst 634 $4601-5596
DARE Officer 577 $3484-4236
Darkroom Technician 577 $3484-4236
Detention Officer 597 $3841-4671
Detention Supervisor 646 $4882-5934
Firearms Examiner 653 $5051-6140
Forensic Services Supervisor 653 $5051-6140
Forensic Specialist I 597 $3841-4671
Forensic Specialist II 616 $4215-5126
Parking Control Officer 547 $3010-3658
Police Communications Supv 642 $4787-5818
Police Comm Services Spec 597 $3841-4671

Police Evidence & Supply Spec 580 $3533-4296
Police Evidence & Supply Supv 600 $3896-4741

Police Investigative Spec 597 $3841-4671
Police Property & Evidence

Specialist 580 $3533-4296
Police Property & Evidence

Supervisor 600 $3896-4741
Police Recruit 606 $4014-4882
Police Service Assistant 561 $3221-3915
Police Service Officer 577 $3484-4236
Police Services Dispatcher 602 $3935-4787
Rangemaster 577 $3484-4236
Sr. Parking Control Officer 567 $3318-4034
Traffic Services Specialist 597 $3841-4671

Salary rate ranges for 2006-07 and 2007-08, respectively, will be established based
upon an Orange County salary survey of the Police Officer rank, top step base salary,
as defined in Article Iv, (Salaries), Section 4.3.

82
A-2011-039

THREE YEAR CONTRACT EXTENSION TO
THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
THE CITY OF SANTA ANA
AND
THE SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION FOR FISCAL YEARS 2010-11
THROUGH 2012-2013

The City of Santa Ana (City) and the Santa Ana Police Officers Association (SAPOA)
have met and agreed to amend the previously amended 2004 - 2010 Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) between the CITY and SAPOA, by extending this amended MOU for
three (3) additional years. The existing MOU provisions shall remain unchanged unless
addressed by this amendment. The new expiration date of the MOU, as amended, shall
be June 30, 2013, and the MOU shall be amended as follows:

AMENDED ARTICLE III (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)
3.0 ATTENDANCE, WORK PERIOD, WORK SCHEDULE & WORKDAY

3.5 DETECTIVE REDEPLOYMENT (New)

 

For the period July 1, 2010 through June 30 2012, all employees assigned as
detectives (investigators) shall work one (1) day per month in the patrol function of
the Field Operations Bureau pursuant to a schedule as determined by the Chief of
Police or his designee.

AMENDED ARTICLE IV (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)

4.0 SALARIES

4.3 Salary Adjustments.
A. (new paragraphs 5-8)

Effective July 1, 2008, the base salary of employees covered by this Agreement shall
be increased by eight (8) salary rate ranges (approximately 4%).

Effective January 1, 2009, the base salary of employees covered by this Agreement
shall be increased by five (5) salary rate ranges (approximately 2.5%).

 

EEE
POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 1
 

Effective July 1, 2010, the base salary of employees covered by this Agreement
shall be increased by zero (0) salary rate ranges.

Effective January 1, 2011, the base salary of employees covered by this
Agreement shall be increased by zero (0) salary rate ranges.

Effective July 1, 2011, the base salary of employees covered by this Agreement
shall be increased by six (6) salary rate ranges (approximately 3%).

Effective July 1, 2012, the base salary of employees covered by this Agreement
shall be increased by seven (7) salary rate ranges (approximately 3.5%).

AMENDED ARTICLE VIII (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)

8.0 OVERTIME

8.4 Compensation for Overtime

A. The preferable method by which overtime shall be compensated is by monetary
payment, at one and one-half (1 1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay.

B. Should the Police Chief determine that the best interests of the City will be served
thereby, he or his designee may permit an employee to be compensated for overtime
work by earning paid compensatory time off at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2)
times the employee's regular rate of pay. The employee will be credited with time
off at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) hours of time for each hour of overtime
worked. This time, hereinafter identified as “comp time” will be accrued in a comp
time bank for each employee. The hours in this bank shall reflect the converted time
value of each hour worked.

1, Effective January 1, 2005 2010, employees are limited to the accumulation of
420 160 hours of comp time. Effective July 1, 2010, employees are limited
to the accumulation of 200 hours of comp time.

 

POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 2
  

2. Beginning July 1, 2011, Fwice-during-each_ealendar-year_beginningApriHt5

end-ending—April30-end eNe a e-Ne ber-30, each
affected employee who has accrued comp time credits, may elect to convert up
to ferty{40) twenty (20) hours of such accrued time each calendar year
quarter to the cash equivalent thereof, to a maximum of eighty (80) hours per
calendar year.

   
 

       

3. For the period July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2011, employees paid out of the
General Fund of the City agree that compensation to them for overtime
earned by them shall be in the form of compensatory time off (comp time)
unless and until they have accumulated a maximum of 200 hours of comp
time. Any accumulation of compensatory time in excess of 200 hours shall
be paid in cash.

4. For the period of July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2011, employees covered by
this Agreement agree to defer the cash out of any comp time. The cash
out option, as modified below, shall be reinstated effective July 1, 2011.
The designated periods for cash out shall be September 15 and ending
September 30; December 15 and ending December 31; March 15 and
ending March 31; and June 15 and ending June 30.

5. The deferral of the cash out option shall not affect an employee's ability
to be compensated for all accumulated comp time upon separation from
employment with the City.

Cc. Use of Comp Time.

1. When an employee submits a request for time off using accrued
compensatory time, and that employee has found a qualified replacement,
the time off request will be granted. “Qualified A qualified
replacement means that the replacement officer or employee is able to
fulfill the requirements of the position to which the requesting officer is
assigned.

2. When an employee submits a request to take time off using accrued
compensatory time and the officer deployment is above minimum staffing
for that the requested day, then the request will be granted without
further conditions. However, if the number of officers scheduled to
work on the day(s) of the request is at or below minimum staffing as
defined by the department, the compensatory time off request will be
granted only if a qualified replacement has volunteered and committed to
work the assignment left open by the request for time off. The
volunteer may exchange days off with the requesting employee within the

 

POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 3
14-day or 7-day work period, whichever applies, or may elect to receive
overtime compensation.

a. For the period July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2011, requests
under this section will be granted only if the volunteer agrees to
exchange days off within the 14 day or 7 day work period, and
agrees that he or she will not be subject to payment for
overtime as a result of the exchange.

3. Requests for use of compensatory time off during holidays as defined by
the current MOU, must be submitted in time to be considered during
the monthly scheduling meeting held by bureau and division commanders
for the upcoming month. These requests will be considered by seniority
and will be granted only if officer deployment is above minimum staffing.

4. Although it is always preferable for the officer to find a qualified
replacement when requesting the use of compensatory time off, if
provided sufficient notice of a request for time off, the department will
work with employees to find a qualified replacement. Sufficient notice
and reasonable period will be defined as follows:

a. Seventy-two (72) hours notice for one (1) day or less of time off
requested.

b. Five (5) calendar days notice for more than one (1) workday up to one
(1) workweek.

c. Fourteen (14) calendar days notice for more than one (1) week
compensatory time off request.

5. If an employee has provided sufficient notice of a compensatory time off
request, the department will work with the employee to find a qualified
replacement in the following manner:

a. The watch commander will maintain a calendar of time off that has been
requested in accordance with the guidelines listed above, Qualified
employees will be allowed to volunteer to work these shifts. In the
future, the department may develop, at its own discretion, an
automated schedule that will contain this information.

b. If an employee volunteers and signs up to work for another employee
who has requested compensatory time off, that volunteering employee
will be held responsible for working that full shift without further
reminder. Employees who do not show up to work, or retract their
offer to replace another officer, may be subject to disciplinary action

— —
POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 4
and may not be permitted to volunteer to work in this manner in the

future.

6. The watch commander shall send out an e-mail message to all officers
requesting a volunteer to cover the shift by switching days off or working on
overtime.

7. When a compensatory time off request is made in a manner that does not

comply with this policy, and granting that request would unduly disrupt the
operations of the department, the department may deny that request.

AMENDED ARTICLE X (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)

10.0 VACATION

10.3 Longevity Vacation

E

Effective July 1, 2005, employees covered by this Agreement shall be given an option
once per calendar year, to receive cash compensation computed on a straight time
basis in lieu of up to a total of forty (40) hours of their longevity vacation leave
benefits set forth in Subsection A above.

Effective July 1, 2009, all employees covered by this Agreement shall defer for the
duration of Fiscal Years 2009-10 and 2010-2011 an employee's ability to cash out
longevity vacation time. The ability to cash out longevity vacation time shall be re-
instated July 1, 2040 2011. Such deferral shall not affect an employee's ability to be
compensated for all accumulated leave upon termination of employment with the City.

. For the period July 1, 2040 2011 through June 30, 2043 2014, employees covered by

this Agreement shall be given an option once per fiscal year, to receive cash
compensation computed on a straight time basis in lieu of up to a total of fifty-three
{83) sixty-seven (67) hours of their longevity vacation leave benefits set forth in
subsection A above.

. Effective July 1, 2043 2014, the yearly longevity cash-out provisions shall revert back

to that as set forth in section 10.3"E", above. Therefore, effective July 1, 2013
2014, employees covered by this Agreement shall be given an option once per fiscal
year to receive cash compensation computed on a straight time basis in lieu of up to a
total of forty (40) hours of their longevity vacation leave benefits set forth in
subsection "A", above.

 

POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 5
Such option may be eliminated or modified at the discretion of the Department to the extent
it is construed as overtime under Department of Labor guidelines implementing provisions of
the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).

Amended ARTICLE XI (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)

11.0 OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE

11.3 Military Leave.

A. Proof of Orders and Reinstatements. An employee shall be granted military leave
if he or she furnishes the Chief Personnel Officer satisfactory proof of his or
her orders to report for duty. Upon return and upon showing proof of actual
service pursuant to such orders, he or she will be reinstated as provided in
Section 9-143 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code.

 

B. Temporary. Members of the reserve forces of the United States, or the National
Guard, granted temporary leave when ordered to duty, in accordance with the
Military and Veterans Code, will be granted leave with pay not to exceed thirty
(30) eatender working days in each calendar year after one year's service with the
City upon presenting satisfactory proof of orders to and from such temporary
active duties.

Amended ARTICLE XIII (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)
13.0 RETIREMENT

13.5 3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit for Safety Members. The City agrees to amend its
contract with CalPERS to provide Safety employees represented by this bargaining unit
with the 3% at 50 Service Retirement benefit effective July 1, 2001.

Payment of 3% at 50 Service Retirement Benefit. The actual cost for the benefit shall
be determined upon receipt of the annual actuarial valuation setting forth employer rates
for the 2001-02 fiscal year and every subsequent year thereafter. In order to provide
this benefit to its current safety members, the City and Association agree that eligible
employees will pay 50% of the total additional normal cost to provide this benefit, not to
exceed 1.42% of safety payroll, at such time as the City of Santa Ana incurs such cost.

Commencing July 1, 2011, all safety members in the Association shall contribute an
additional one percent (1%) of payroll to CalPERS for the cost of the service
retirement benefit, for a total contribution of 2.42%.

For the period July 1, 2012 to June 30, 2013 all safety members in the Association
shall contribute an additional one percent (1%) of payroll to CalPERS for the cost of
the service retirement benefit, for a total contribution of 3.42%. Effective July

 

POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 6
13.6

13.9

1, 2013 this additional 1% contribution shall sunset and the ongoing member
contribution shall be 2.42%.

 

Military Service Credit as Public Service. Effective January 2, 2001, Safety employees,
and April 5, 2002, Miscellaneous employees, respectively, may elect to purchase up to
four (4) years of service credit for any continuous active military or merchant marine
service prior to employment. The employee must contribute an amount equal to the
contribution for current and prior service that the employee and the employer would
have made with respect to that period of service. The City agrees that, as soon as
practicable following Council approval of this Agreement, and amendment to the CalPERS
contract, employees who elect to purchase service credit may do so on a pre-tax basis.

Reopener re Employer CalPERS Contribution (New)

If at any time during the term of this Agreement the City receives notification
from CalPERS that the employer contribution rate for a fiscal year for the cost of
providing the 3% at 50 service retirement benefit to members of the Association
meets or exceeds 25%, then the provisions of section 13.5 “Payment of 3% at 50
Service Retirement Benefit" shall be subject to being immediately reopened for
negotiation at the request of the City.

Amended ARTICLE XXII (new language in bold; deleted provisions lined out)

22.0 LAYOFFS

G. The City agrees that there shall be no layoffs of members of this bargaining unit

during the fiscal years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011.

H. The City agrees that there will be no layoffs of members of this bargaining unit

during fiscal year 2011-2012 except upon the occurrence of a five percent (5%)
or greater decline in the 2010-2011 general fund revenues of the City. For
purposes of this provision, general fund revenues of the City will not include
one-time revenues to the City or transfers between other existing City funds
and the general fund.

 

 

POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 7
ARTICLE XXVI
26.0 TERM OF AGREEMENT

26.1 The term of this Agreement shall be from July 1, 2004 through June 30, 2008 2014
2013.

ARTICLE XXVII
27.0 RATIFICATION AND EXECUTION

27.1 The City and the Association have reached an understanding as to certain
recommendations to be made to the City Council for the City of Santa Ana and have
agreed that the parties hereto will jointly urge said Council to adopt a new wage and
salary resolution which will provide for the changes contained in said joint
recommendations. The City and the Association acknowledge that this Agreement shall
not be in full force and effect until ratified by the membership of the Association and
adopted by the City Council of the City of Santa Ana, Subject to the foregoing, this
Agreement is hereby executed by the authorized representatives of the City and the
Association and entered into this 22nd day of February 2011.

CITY OF SANTA ANA, a
Municipal Corporation of

APR 06 20il
Dated:

APR 06 20i1
Dated:

 

CITY MANAGER

ated: _3{24lui by: Wits ae

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
PERSONNEL SERVICES

 

ATTEST: APPROVED AS TO FORM:

Dare D eZ (at,
CLERK OF THE COUNGIL CITY ATTORNEY

EET
POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 8
This Agreement has been ratified by the membership of the Santa Ana Police Officers
Association.

Dated:_2@-22-//

SANTA ANA POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION

By:
Aesssent CHARLES GOLDWASSER ESQ.

 

POA CONTRACT EXTENSION 2010-13 Page 9
