MEET AND CONFER
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
CITY OF DALLAS
AND THE MEET AND CONFER TEAM CONSISTING
OF
DALLAS BLACK FIRE FIGHTERS ASSOCIATION,
BLACK POLICE ASSOCIATION OF GREATER
DALLAS, THE NATIONAL LATINO PEACE
OFFICERS ASSOCIATION GREATER DALLAS
CHAPTER, THE DALLAS FRATERNAL ORDER OF
POLICE LODGE 588, THE DALLAS POLICE
ASSOCIATION, DALLAS HISPANIC FIREFIGHTERS
ASSOCIATION, AND THE DALLAS FIREFIGHTERS
ASSOCIATION

EXPIRES SEPTEMBER 30, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE oe.essccssssssssseseseessesessscsucssssessscencesecscevecucanecneenesnesarssesansnscussvecessessssesrssssasssssnsensnnsencentogty 4

ARTICLE 1 AUTHORITY AND RECOGNITION

 

ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS .....esssscssssessessessessesseessesecsvesnesneeseesesneeneauscnsensacsrssassasenssestaseneneensseatecgneey 4

ARTICLE 3 OPERATIONAL IMPROVEMENT INITIATIVES...

 

ARTICLE 4 TIME FOR MEET AND CONFER ACTIVITIES .....seessecesssessressessssessneseesenennennses 6

ARTICLE 5 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS,

 

 

ARTICLE 6 NO STRIKE, NO LOCK-OUT.....::scsssseesssssstesssessneesseneeesneeessnesseessnesnecsssseseceneennensenens 8
ARTICLE 7 WAGES .

ARTICLE 8 EDUCATION INCENTIVE PAY ...cscssssssssssnesssessseestensesnesssssnsssnecaesnsesssseseennensnennees 12
ARTICLE 9 SWIFT WATER ASSIGNMENT PAY ....cecssscsesssteseessseesssestssssesneessesnasenssesnsennennsernes 13
ARTICLE 10 DALLAS POLICE OFFICER CALL BACK uu... eessscssssteeseestsssstesseesseseseennersncenees 13
ARTICLE 11 COMPENSATORY TIME ......scsssessessesstssneeseeseeseenssnenseersnssasenesssenessenssneaseseneseseneens 14
ARTICLE 12 PHASE DOWN ......scsssessessssseesecseessesnesnecnesneesnesnenecenenseneeasanssrssecsessaseessansnstaatenenesasses 15
ARTICLE 13 HOLIDAYS ....esesescsessesssesssesseecseeensecensecneecnnensrensesnscuneasecsesssssesssseesscsnsenecneennessans 18
ARTICLE 14 TRAINEE FIRE AND RESCUE OFFICERS «0... .sssssseessessessssesssssseereresssssneennesnnennes 18
ARTICLE 15 EXTRA JOBS FOR CITY PERMITTED SPECIAL EVENTS ........sssseesseseeseeseees 19
ARTICLE 16 TRADE TIME POLICY ....scssscessssssessseceseessneeseseneenecseesnssseensscenecssrcssesssneanensneseangans 19
ARTICLE 17 CATSTROPHIC LEAVE PROGRAM ...ecscssssessessteenteeneesseessecneesnersueneeresetesseeanenss 20
ARTICLE 18 TAKE HOME VEHICLE PROGRAM .......sessssesseseeseseessesseesseeesessnnseneesnennenanaess 23
ARTICLE 19 MERIT PAY STEP ELIGIBILITY .....cesscccceeestesseecseeseeresssesssessnersaessneeessnneesnceanenns 23
ARTICLE 20 MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN PAY AND BENEFITS.....-ssssesessssssseeessssesseesenes 23
ARTICLE 21 LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS OF AGREEMENT......ssseecssssssesesssssessssnness 25

i)
ARTICLE 22 COMPLETE AGREEMENT...

 

ARTICLE 23 SAVINGS CLAUSE ...ce.sssssssesscssssssssssseessssssssssssssssnssassstssssissssssssssassssecsussessssssneee 26

ARTICLE 24 DURATION AND TERMINATION .

 

ARTICLE 25 NOTICE vessesssssssesssssssssvsssssvevesssssscecceseessessccecececssssssnsnsssssssssseseeesseeeeesssseasarassuasessessse 27

SIGNATURES... csssssscssssssessessssneeesecssneesssteeessseseseeeee 28

 
PREAMBLE
The City of Dallas, Texas (“City”) and the Firefighter Employee Groups and the Police Officer
Employee Groups (“Meet and Confer Team”) in order to meet and discuss issues of mutual
concern, as provided in Texas Local Government Code (“TLGC”) Chapter 147, have reached the
following Agreement through the process of Meet and Confer with the objective of fostering
effective cooperation between the City and its Firefighters and Police Officers.

ARTICLE 1

AUTHORITY AND RECOGNITION

The City recognizes the Meet and Confer Team composed of the Police Officer Employee
Groups and the Firefighter Employee Groups requested to be recognized by a majority of all
Firefighters and all Police Officers pursuant to Section 147.0031, TLGC, as the sole and
exclusive bargaining agent for all covered Firefighters and Police Officers, pursuant to Section
147.0035 of the TLGC, excluding Majors and above in the Police Department and Deputy Chiefs
and above in the Fire-Rescue Department by mutual agreement.

ARTICLE 2

DEFINITIONS

“Agreement” refers to this Meet and Confer Agreement and only to this Meet and Confer
Agreement, which is an Agreement that has been negotiated between the City of Dallas and the
Meet and Confer Team pursuant to Chapter 147 of the TLGC.

“Firefighter Employee Group” means an organization as defined in Section 147.002(2), Texas
Local Government Code.

“Police Officer Employee Group” means an organization as defined in Section 147.002(4),
Texas Local Government Code.

“Business Day” means Monday through Friday during normal business hours of 8:00 o’clock
a.m. to 5:00 o’clock p.m. and shall not include weekends, City holidays, or days on which the
City is closed, except as otherwise specifically defined in this Agreement.

“Calendar Day” means each day inclusive of weekends and holidays.

“Police Chief” means the head of the Police Department of the City of Dallas, Texas.

“Fire Chief’ means the head of the Fire-Rescue Department of the City of Dallas, Texas.

“City” means the City of Dallas, Texas.

“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City.
“Department” means the Fire-Rescue Department of the City and / or the Police Department of
the City, as applicable.

“Police Officer” means a sworn police officer employed by the City who is covered by the
Dallas Police and Fire Pension System and is classified by the City as nonexempt, as defined in
Section 147.002(3) of the TLGC, not including a Police Officer with a rank above that of
Captain, a Civilian, or a Municipal Marshal.

“Firefighter” means a firefighter employed by the City of Dallas who is covered by the Dallas
Police and Fire Pension System and is classified by the City of Dallas as nonexempt, as defined
in Section 147.002(1), of the TLGC not to include a firefighter above the rank of Battalion Chief
or Section Chief, or Civilians.

“Officer” means a Police Officer and/or a Firefighter covered by this Agreement.

“Meet and Confer Team” means the Firefighter Employee Group and Police Officer Employee
Group who are members of the Meet and Confer Team recognized as the sole and exclusive
bargaining agent for all covered Firefighters and Police Officers by the City in Resolution
Number 100534 adopted by the City Council on February 24, 2010 consisting of the Dallas
Black Fire Fighters Association, Black Police Association of Greater Dallas, the National Latino
Peace Officers Association Greater Dallas Chapter, the Dallas Fraternal Order of Police Lodge
588, the Dallas Police Association, Dallas Hispanic Firefighters Association, and the Dallas
Firefighters Association.

“Organization” means each Firefighter Employee Group and each Police Officer Employee
Group who is a member of the Meet and Confer Team.

“Party” or “Parties” means the City and the Organizations who are members of the Meet and
Confer Team.

“Property Tax Benchmark” means the increase in certified property tax values that must be
achieved in order for across-the-board pay increases to be considered,

“Certified Property Tax Value(s)” means the net taxable value of the certified appraisal roll for
all real and business personal property located within the City of Dallas as reported to the City
by the chief appraiser of each of the four county appraisal districts in which the City of Dallas is
located — Dallas, Denton, Collin and Rockwall counties. The certified appraisal rolls include the
certified taxable values (Texas Property Tax Code, Chapter 26 Section 26.01 paragraphs (a) and
(b)) and the certified disputed taxable values (Texas Property Tax Code, Chapter 26, Section
26.01, paragraph (c)). The chief appraisers provide both the appraisal districts’ values as well as
the property owners’ values for the disputed values. The lower of the two disputed values is
added to the certified taxable values to determine the total net taxable value.
“Sales Tax Floor” means the minimum amount of sales tax revenues that must be received in
order for across-the-board pay increases to be considered in FY2014-2015 and FY2015-2016.

“Sales Tax Revenues” means the monthly net payment received from the Texas Comptroller of
Public Accounts (TCPA) plus sales taxes collected by the City for taxable services provided by
the City that are not remitted to the TCPA. The City is responsible for collecting sales tax on
certain taxable services it provides and remitting these taxes to the TCPA. The City reports the
total amount of sales taxes it collects to the TCPA; however, the City retains sales tax revenues
that belong to the City (rather than remitting them to TCPA then having TCPA return the same
revenues back to the City).

“TLGC” means Texas Local Government Code.
ARTICLE 3
OPERATIONAL IMPROVEMENT INITIATIVES

The unique point of view of employee associations provides opportunities for employee groups
to provide input to city/departmental management in exploring improvements in service
provision. Therefore, the parties to this Agreement commit to creating two work groups, one
from each public safety dimension, meeting every other month, to discuss topics approved by the
Chief of Police, the Chief of Fire, and/or the City Manager that are intended to increase
operational efficiency and effectiveness within the provision of public safety services to the
citizens of Dallas. Officer participants within the proposed groups (including the number of
participants and the individuals assigned) must be mutually satisfactory to management and the
employee associations. Input and suggestions from the Officer participants will be sought,
however, the suggestions are non-binding and do not constitute meet and confer negotiations or
bargaining. Further, this Article does not impair or in any way affect any management rights of
the City and does not give the employee associations or the work groups any authority or veto
power over the City’s control of its public safety operations.

ARTICLE 4
TIME FOR MEET AND CONFER ACTIVITIES
Section 1. Time For Meet and Confer Activities.

A. In the calendar year in which this Agreement will terminate and after recognition by the
City of the Meet and Confer Team for the next negotiation cycle, the City will create in the
HRIS System an activity code for Meet and Confer activities. Representatives of each Police
Officer Employee Group and each Firefighter Employee Group (hereinafter referred to as
“Organization”) who are members of said Meet and Confer Team may use 50 hours of work
time for use by the representatives of that Organization for negotiation activities described
herein conducted during on duty hours. Hours designated for use for Meet and Confer
activities will not carry over beyond the end of the calendar year in which negotiations
commence.
B. Each Organization will inform the City’s designated representative and the head of the
respective Department or designee of the name of the representative who can utilize this
activity code for Meet and Confer purposes. The use of work time will be granted unless
such use would interfere with the operational needs of the Department, If the Chief declares
an emergency, he or she may order the Organization’s representative to report to work for
the duration of the emergency.

C. This work time used for Meet and Confer activities will count as hours worked for the
purpose of calculating overtime. Hours will be utilized for the time an Organization’s
representative spends preparing for, traveling to and from and attending scheduled Meet and
Confer negotiating meetings with the City.

D. Except in the event of a declared emergency or when necessary to complete a call at the end
of the workday, an Organization’s representative using work time for the purpose of Meet
and Confer activities under this Article shall not be required to work such additional hours
for the City that would exceed the Department’s daily restriction on the total of hours
worked and hours worked in secondary employment.

Section 2. Time Off Without Pay.

The City Manager will consider requests for additional time off without pay to attend to other
Meet and Confer business.

ARTICLE 5
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1. Except as provided for by State or Federal law or as expressly modified,
delegated, or abridged by the provisions of this Agreement, the City shall retain the sole,

exclusive, and vested right, prerogative, power and authority to manage the Departments and the
workforce in the Departments in all respects, including, but not limited to:

1. the right to hire, train, promote, demote, discipline, suspend, discharge,
reprimand, assign, reassign, transfer, retain, or layoff employees;

2. the right to establish, eliminate, or modify the qualifications and minimum
requirements for hiring, training, promotions, transfers, and job assignments and
reassignments;

3. the right to establish, eliminate, classify, reclassify, or modify the number and

types of positions and job classifications;

4. the right to assign and direct the work of Officers, including the scheduling and
assignment and reassignment of duties, responsibilities and hours of work;

5. the right to establish, eliminate, or modify the methods, processes, means and
personnel by which operations are to be carried out;
6. the right to establish, eliminate, modify, review, and enforce rules and standards
governing job performance, personal conduct and appearance, uniforms and
equipment, safety, training, education, attendance, discipline, and efficiency;

7. the right to establish, abolish, or modify processes and procedures for
investigating and reviewing Officer conduct and complaints, relating to that
conduct; and °

8. the right to determine the wages, salaries, rates of pay, hours of work, and other
terms of employment of the Officers and employees in the Departments.

Section 2. Except as provided for by State or Federal law or as expressly modified,
delegated, or abridged by the provisions of this Agreement, the exclusive rights and prerogatives
of management not expressly mentioned or described by this Article are nevertheless retained by
the City and are not to be interpreted as having been diminished, waived, or ceded in any respect.
If this Agreement does not, by its terms, expressly and specifically restrict, modify, or abridge a
particular right or prerogative of management, then the City retains such right or prerogative of
management, solely and exclusively subject to State or Federal law.

Section 3. Except as provided herein and excluding any existing agreements, the City agrees
that, for the period of three years only from October 1, 2013 through September 30, 2016, it will
not enter into a contract with a private entity to perform EMS services that are currently
performed by the Dallas Fire-Rescue Department, subject to the following provisions. Nothing in
this section precludes the City from entering into a contract with a private entity that provides
EMS services for facilities or properties owned or leased by the City, such as the Convention
Center and other City owned facilities and properties. Nothing in this section precludes the City
from receiving or providing EMS services to or from another public entity under an inter-local
agreement.

Section 4. The Parties to this Agreement agree to provide written notice to the other Parties
120 calendar days prior to seeking any changes or modifications to Chapter XVI of the Dallas
City Charter during the term of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 6
NO STRIKE, NO LOCK-OUT
Section 1, | The City agrees that it will not lock out any Police Officer or Firefighter.
Section 2. The Meet and Confer Team member Organizations agree that neither they, any
one of the Organizations, nor any Police Officer or Firefighter will permit, sanction, call,
encourage, support, acquiesce or engage in any strike; sit-down; slow-down; speed-up; sick-out;
sympathy strike; or any other work stoppage or interference with the operation of the City for

any reason.

Section 3. Firefighters and Police Officers of the City may not engage in strikes against the
City. A Firefighter or Police Officer who participates in a strike forfeits all civil service rights,
reemployment rights, and any other rights, benefits, or privileges the F: irefighter or Police Officer
enjoys as a result of employment or prior employment.

Section 4, —_In this Article, “strike” means failing to report for duty in concerted action with
others, willfully being absent from an assigned position, stopping work, abstaining from the full,
faithful, and proper performance of the duties of employment, or interfering with the operation of
the City. However, this section does not prohibit a Firefighter or Police Officer from conferring
with members of the City Council about conditions, compensation, rights, privileges, or
obligations of employment.

Section 5, This Agreement may not be construed to interfere with the free speech right,
guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, of an individual
Firefighter or a Police Officer to endorse or dissent from any agreement.

ARTICLE 7
WAGES
Section 1. Merit Pay Step.

During FY2013-2014, FY2014-2015, and FY2015-2016, Officers will receive merit pay step
increases if they meet all merit pay step eligibility requirements established by the City and/or
Departments. No new steps will be added to the uniformed police salary schedule or the
uniformed fire salary schedule in Attachments A and B of this Agreement; thus, Officers who
reach the top step of their rank will not receive any additional merit pay steps during the term of
this Agreement. If this Agreement continues in effect after September 30, 2016, no Officers will
be entitled to merit pay step increases after September 30, 2016 under this Agreement.

Section 2. Uniformed Police and Uniformed Fire Salary Schedules.

Subject to all of the other provisions of this Agreement, the uniformed police salary schedule and
the uniformed fire salary schedule for Police Officers/Firefighters covered by this Agreement
shall be paid, during the existence of this Agreement, as follows:

A. FY 2013-2014: The uniformed police salary and uniformed fire salary schedules in
Attachments A and B will be in effect for FY2013-2014, There is no provision for any
across-the-board pay increase in FY2013-2014 included in this Agreement.

B. FY2014-2015 and FY2015-2016: The uniformed police salary and uniformed fire salary
schedules in Attachments A and B in effect for FY2013-2014 will remain in effect in
FY2014-2015 and FY2015-2016. If the Sales Tax Floors and the Property Tax Benchmarks
outlined below are met, an across-the-board increase will be given in either or both fiscal
years as described below and the salary schedules changed accordingly.
1. Sales Tax Floors:
Sales Tax Revenues must not fall below a Sales Tax Floor in either FY2014-2015 or
FY2015-2016 as outlined below:

a. For FY2014-2015: Sales Tax Revenues actually received for the period of March 1,
2013 through February 28, 2014 (received from the Texas Comptroller of Public
Accounts (TCPA) in May 2013 through April 2014) cannot fall below a floor of
$236,556,346 which is sales tax revenues actually received for March 2012 through
February 2013 (received from the TCPA in May 2012 through April 2013).

If the amount of Sales Tax Revenues described above falls below $236,556,346, then
no across-the-board increase will be given in FY2014-2015 regardless of the changes
to the Certified Property Tax Values as outlined below.

b. For FY2015-2016: Sales Tax Revenues actually received for the period of March 1,
2014 through February 28, 2015 (received from the TCPA in May 2014 through April
2015) cannot fall below a floor of the higher of the following two amounts: (A)
$236,556,346 or (B) the Sales Tax Revenues for the period of March 1, 2013 through
February 28, 2014 (received from the TCPA in May 2013 through April 2014).

If the amount of Sales Tax Revenues falls below the floor in “1.b.” above, then no
across-the-board increase will be given in FY2015-2016 regardless of the changes to
the Certified Property Tax Values as outlined below.

2. Property Tax Benchmarks:
During FY2014-2015 and FY2015-2016, Officers may receive up to, but no more than, a

combined total of a four percent (4%) across-the-board increase only if: 1) the Sales Tax
Floors outlined above are met; and 2) certain Property Tax Benchmarks are met as
outlined below.

a. For FY2014-2015 only one of the following will apply:

i. If 2014 (for FY2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase less
than a total of 3.3% above the 2013 (for FY 2013-2014 budget) Certified Property
Tax Values, Officers will not receive any amount of an across-the-board pay
increase. The 2013 Certified Property Tax Value is $87,251,522,141.

ii. If 2014 (for FY2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 3.3% above the 2013 (for FY 2013-2014 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a 1% across-the-board increase, effective April 1,
2015. The 2013 Certified Property Tax Value is $87,251,522,141.

iii. If 2014 (for FY2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 3.8% above the 2013 (for FY 2013-2014 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a 1.75% across-the-board increase, effective April 1,
2015. The 2013 Certified Property Tax Value is $87,251,522,141.

10
iv.

vi.

r

iti.

vi.

If 2014 (for FY2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 4.3% above the 2013 (for FY 2013-2014 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a 2.5% across-the-board increase, effective April 1
2015. The 2013 Certified Property Tax Value is $87,251,522, 141.

>

If 2014 (for FY2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 4.8% above the 2013 (for FY 2013-2014 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a 3.25% across-the-board increase, effective April 1,
2015. The 2013 Certified Property Tax Value is $87,251,522,141.

If 2014 (for FY2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 5.3% above the 2013 (for FY 2013-2014 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a 4% across-the-board increase, effective April 1,
2015. The 2013 Certified Property Tax Value is $87,25 1,522,141.

For FY2015-2016 only one of the following will apply:

If 2015 (for FY 2015-2016 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase less
than a total of 5.0% above the 2014 (for FY 2014-2015 budget) Certified Property
Tax Values, Officers will not receive any amount of an across-the-board pay
increase.

If 2015 (for FY 2015-2016 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 5.0% above the 2014 (for FY 2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a maximum of a 1% across-the-board increase,
effective April 1, 2016 subject to the provisions of Section 3 of this Article.

If 2015 (for FY 2015-2016 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 5.5% above the 2014 (for FY 2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a maximum of a 1.75% across-the-board increase,
effective April 1, 2016 subject to the provisions of Section 3 of this Article.

If 2015 (for FY 2015-2016 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 6.0% above the 2014 (for FY 2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a maximum of a 2.5% across-the-board increase,
effective April 1, 2016 subject to the provisions of Section 3 of this Article.

If 2015 (for FY 2015-2016 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 6.5% above the 2014 (for FY 2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a maximum of a 3.25% across-the-board increase,
effective April 1, 2016 subject to the provisions of Section 3 of this Article.

If 2015 (for FY 2015-2016 budget) Certified Property Tax Values increase a total
of at least 7.0% above the 2014 (for FY 2014-2015 budget) Certified Property Tax
Values, Officers will receive a maximum of a 4% across-the-board increase,
effective April 1, 2016 subject to the provisions of Section 3 of this Article.

Section 3. Maximum Across-the-Board Increase.

If both the Sales Tax Floor and the Property Tax Benchmarks requirements as outlined above are
met, the total maximum across-the-board percentage increase for the complete term of this
Agreement is capped at 4%. If this 4% maximum cap is reached in FY2014-2015, then no
additional across-the-board increase will be provided in FY2015-2016 or in any remaining
period of this Agreement. If, however, in FY2014-2015 Officers receive less than an across-the-
board percentage increase of 4%, Officers will be eligible in FY2015-2016 for whatever
percentage remains. For example, if Officers receive a 2.5% across-the-board increase in
FY2014-2015, they will be eligible to receive an additional 1.5% across-the-board increase, up to
the 4% maximum cap, in FY2015-2016 if the Sales Tax Floor and Property Tax Value
Benchmarks are met as described above.

Any percentage increase to the uniformed police and uniformed fire salary schedules in FY2014-
2015 or FY2015-2016 will be applied to the uniformed police and uniformed fire salary
schedules in place in FY2013-2014, included as Attachments A and B of this Agreement. For
example, if an across-the-board increase occurred in FY2014-2015, and conditions are met that
allow for another across-the-board increase in FY2015-2016, the percentage increase to
uniformed police and uniformed fire salary schedules for FY2015-2016 will be computed by
applying the increase to the FY2013-2014 uniformed police and uniformed fire salary schedules
rather than applying the increase based on the FY2014-2015 uniformed police and uniformed
fire salary schedules.

ARTICLE 8
EDUCATION INCENTIVE PAY

Effective April 1, 2013, Education Incentive Pay will be:

 

 

 

 

Pay Rate
0-45 | 45 hours or more Max w/o Bachelor’s
hours Bachelors Degree
Effective Every additional 3
April 1, 2013 $0 hours credit above 45 | $240 per month $300 per month

 

 

 

 

hours - $12 per month

 

Only college hours with a passing grade from a duly accredited university or college approved
by the City of Dallas Civil Service Department prior to enrollment are eligible for Education
Incentive Pay.

 

Education Incentive Pay is limited to a maximum of $300 per month, regardless of the number of
degrees earned by an Officer.
Education Incentive Pay changes become effective on the semester closing date. If the transcript
does not have a semester closing date, any original catalog or other document from the institution
that indicates a semester closing date will suffice.

To be paid as of the semester closing date, transcripts must be submitted to the Human
Resources Department, City Hall, 6AN, within thirty (30) days of semester completion. If
transcripts are not received by the City’s Human Resources Department within 30 days of
semester completion, regardless of the reason the transcripts are not submitted, Education
Incentive Pay becomes effective the date the transcript was received by the City’s Human
Resources Department and no retroactive Education Incentive Pay will be allowed.

ARTICLE 9
SWIFT WATER ASSIGNMENT PAY

Effective October 1, 2013, Firefighters assigned to stations and who are designated by the
Fire Chief for Swift Water Assignment pay will receive the following:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Effective October 1, 2013
Swift Water Assignment Pay
Lieutenant and below Captain and Above
Swift Water
Assignment Pay $150 $350
(Per month)
ARTICLE 10

DALLAS POLICE OFFICER CALL BACK

The Dallas Police Department's police officer call back procedures require assigned police
officers to be available by phone during the police officer’s off-duty hours, The police officer is
considered ‘on-call’ and must duly respond to any such business related calls by adhering to the
police officer call back procedures.

Under this Agreement, if a police officer is called during call back hours for police related
business questions, while ordinarily off duty, he/she will be compensated with either overtime or
compensatory time for the amount of time of the phone call.

Ifa police officer is called between the hours of 10:00 PM — 6:00 AM and the circumstances do
not require the police officer to report to duty for any reason such as investigation, arrest,
interview, interrogation, etc. but can be handled during the course of the call over the phone, the
police officer will be compensated a minimum of 0.5 hours of either overtime or compensatory
time.
If any phone call during call back hours takes longer than 0.5 hours to complete, the police
officer will be compensated for the amount of time it takes to conclude the duties of an on call
police officer.

If a police officer is called into work during the call back hours, the police officer will be
compensated from the time that the phone call begins to the time when the task is completed plus
0.5 hours for travel time to the police officer’s residence.

ARTICLE 11
COMPENSATORY TIME
Section 1. | Compensatory Time in General.

As permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”) 29 U.S.C. § 207(0) and the Personnel
Rules of the City, eligible Firefighters and Police Officers as defined in Article 2 of this
Agreement may voluntarily elect to receive compensatory time in lieu of overtime with
departmental approval. Such compensatory time will be at a rate of not less than one and one-
half hour for each hour of employment for which overtime compensation is required by 29
U.S.C. § 207. This Section does not apply to firefighters assigned to the Emergency Response
Bureau working 2808 regularly scheduled hours per year.

Section 2. Special Compensatory Time Period.

Compensatory time accrued during the eighteen month period from October 1, 2010 through
March 31, 2012 must be used by December 31, 2015 and will not be paid unless required by law.

ARTICLE 12
PHASE DOWN

Effective upon execution of this Agreement, the purpose of the Phase Down Program (“PDP” or
“Phase Down”) is two-fold. First, it provides Officers with the opportunity to receive payout of
leave balances over time rather than in one lump sum payment. Secondly, Phase Down gives the
City advance notice of an Officer’s decision to terminate employment, which will afford the City
the opportunity to better provide for future public safety staffing needs. Phase Down does not
affect, in any manner, other City policies except as noted in this Article. Chapter 34 of the Dallas
City Code imposes certain limitations on the amount of leave that is available to be paid to
employees, based on the employee’s position and hire date. All of these provisions continue to
apply to all Officers who do not participate in Phase Down.

Section 1. Definitions.

For purposes of this Article, the following definitions will apply in addition to the general
definitions under Article 2 of this Agreement:
“2808 Firefighter” means a Firefighter employed in the Emergency Operations Bureau of the
Fire-Rescue Department of the City whose work schedule and pay is based on 2808 paid hours
annually on the date he or she enrolls in the PDP.

“Eligible Leave Time” means vacation leave time, attendance incentive leave time,
compensatory time, and for Officers who are eligible to retire or have at least 20 years of service
sick leave time, up to a maximum of 1,080 hours for 2808 Firefighters or up to a maximum of
720 hours for all other firefighters and police officers whose work schedules and pay is based on
2080 paid hours annually.

“Final Hourly Rate” means the Officer’s total pay including the applicable the base pay on the
uniformed police and uniformed salary schedule and all special pay items for that Officer at the
time the Officer enrolls in the PDP.

Section 2. Eligibility.

 

Upon retirement, Officers that have completed 20 or more years of service with the Department
will be eligible to participate in Phase Down. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if an
Officer’s employment is terminated for cause, he or she will not be eligible to participate in
Phase Down.

Section 3. Terms and Conditions of Phase Down.

All Officers who elect to participate in Phase Down must enroll as indicated in the “Enrollment”
section of this Article and agree to the following terms and conditions:

1. Enrollment in Phase Down is an IRREVOCABLE decision. Once an Officer submits an
application and it is accepted by the City, the Officer agrees that he/she will not request
or apply for any positions that involve providing services to the City.

2. An Officer becomes enrolled in Phase Down when the Officer completes, signs, and
submits the enrollment form.

3. Each Officer who enrolls in Phase Down agrees to terminate employment with the City
on the date specified in the Officer’s enrollment form, as submitted to the PDP.

4. Each Officer agrees that once employment is terminated in accordance with PDP
enrollment, the Officer will no longer be employed by the City in any capacity and will
not have any rights related to employment with the City, except as outlined in this
Article.

5. Once an Officer terminates employment, as agreed under the PDP, the Officer:
a. Will not accrue any leave time (including, but not limited to sick time, vacation
time, attendance incentive leave time, or compensatory time) in any form.

15
b. Will not be paid for any City Holidays.

Will not be eligible for Workers Compensation.

d. Will no longer be an active member of any pension plan sponsored by the City for
purposes of accruing additional service, compensation, or contribution credits
under such plan, effective on the retirement or termination date specified in the
Officer’s enrollment form.

e. Will not hold himself or herself out to be an Officer or, in any other capacity, a
representative of the Department or City.

9

6. Except 2808 firefighters, each Officer will decide to participate either at the 40-hour level
or the 80-hour level at the time of enrollment. Each 2808 Firefighter, however, will
decide to participate either at the 54-hour level or the 108-hour level at the time of
enrollment. Each Officer’s total amount of Eligible Leave Time will be credited one-
tenth of the participation level on each of ten workdays (including holidays which are
unpaid for Officers participating in phase down) during the pay period. Officers Eligible
Leave Time will be paid in each successive pay period until their Eligible Leave Time is
fully paid. Officers will not have the option to stop and start payments or change the level
of participation once their application has been approved.

a. Participation at the 80-hour Level: Hours will be credited to the PDP at the rate
of eight hours on each of ten workdays (including holidays which are unpaid for
Officers participating in Phase Down) during the pay period while the Officer is
receiving PDP payments.

b. Participation at the 40-hour Level: Hours will be credited to the PDP at the rate
of four hours on each of ten workdays (including holidays which are unpaid for
Officers participating in Phase Down) during the pay period while the Officer is
receiving PDP payments.

c. Participation at the 108-hour Level: Hours will be credited to the PDP at the rate
of 10.8 hours on each of ten workdays (including holidays which are unpaid for
Officers participating in Phase Down) during the pay period while the 2808
Firefighter is receiving PDP payments.

d. Participation at the 54-hour Level: Hours will be credited to the PDP at the rate
of 5.4 hours on each of ten workdays (including holidays which are unpaid for
officers participating in Phase Down) weekday during the pay period while the
2808 Firefighter is receiving PDP payments.
7.

10.

ll.

Except 2808 firefighters, each Officer shall receive payment equal to the Officer’s Final
Hourly Rate multiplied by either 40 or 80 hours (depending on the Officer’s election at
the time of enrollment in the PDP) for each two-week pay period. 2808 Firefighters shall
receive payment equal to the 2808 Firefighter’s Final Hourly Rate multiplied by either 54
or 108 hours (depending on the 2808 Firefighter’s election at the time of enrollment in
the PDP) for each two-week pay period.

When an Officer's hours of Eligible Leave Time balances are reduced below the level
selected for the two week pay period, the Officer will terminate participation in the PDP
on the first day for which there are no hours available to be paid.

While participating in the PDP, Officers will be eligible to purchase healthcare benefits
from the City at the same rates and at the same level of coverage as active employees of
the City including any tobacco surcharges or premium reductions for attainment of
wellness points (or activities), if available for active employees.

To continue health benefits coverage after the phase down period has ended, the Officer
must inform the City on the Enrollment form of their intention to continue in the retiree
health plan after the Phase Down period is complete and all Eligible Leave Balances have
been paid. Officers who do not select the option to continue in retiree coverage on the
Enrollment form will not be allowed to opt in later. Retiree rates will apply for Officers
hired or rehired prior to January 1, 2010. Officers hired or rehired on or after January 1,
2010 who retire from the city may participate in the retiree health benefit program but the
cost of continued health benefits coverage must be paid entirely by the person and no
subsidy will be provided by the City for the coverage.

If an Officer dies while participating in Phase Down, any outstanding balances that would
have been paid to the Officer during the remaining pay periods of the Officer’s
participation will be paid to a beneficiary(ies) designated on the PDP enrollment form. If
no beneficiary is designated on the PDP enrollment form, the remaining amounts will be
paid to the Officer’s estate.

Section 4. Enrollment.

If an Officer desires to enroll in the PDP, the Officer shall:

Ll.

2.

Complete, date, sign, and submit an enrollment form.

The Officer shall state and affirm the following on the enrollment form:
a. The date the Officer plans to terminate employment and begin receiving PDP
payments. The date must be at least 90 days after the date the Officer signs and
submits the PDP enrollment form.

b. The Officer has read and understands all the Terms and Conditions of the PDP
included in this Article.

c. The Officer agrees to update City on any changes to the Officer’s name, address,
or phone number provided on the enrollment form.

d. The Officer understands that the decision to enroll in the PDP is IRREVOCABLE
and effective on the date the officer’s application is signed and submitted.

3. The Officer agrees not to perform any paid services for the City at any time in the future
after the date of termination specified on the enrollment form.

ARTICLE 13
HOLIDAYS
Section 1. Additional Holidays.

For the Fiscal Year from October 1, 2013 through September 30, 2014 only, Police Officers and
Firefighters covered by this Agreement shall be entitled to Patriot Day (September 11) and Cesar
Chavez Day (March 31) as paid holidays in addition to the list of days designated as the official
holidays in Section 34-25(a) of the Dallas City Code.

These holidays will remain in effect in FY2014-2015 and in FY2015-2016 if the benchmarks for
an across-the-board increase are not met and no across-the-board increase is included for the
fiscal year. If, however, any amount of an across-the-board increase is awarded per Article 7 of
this Agreement, in the first fiscal year in which an across-the-board increase is awarded, these
two holidays will be eliminated and cannot be reinstated.

ARTICLE 14
TRAINEE FIRE AND RESCUE OFFICERS

Trainee Fire and Rescue officers (“FRO”) will not attend paramedic school immediately
following completion of Recruit training. When the Trainee FROs have completed training and
are certified by the State of Texas as Firefighter/Emergency Medical Technicians (“EMT”), they
will become Apprentice FROs and will be assigned to the Emergency Response Bureau for
additional training. After completing six months of field training, the Apprentice FROs will
become Probationary FROs. This final probationary period will be for six months. After the
successful completion of this probationary period, the Probationary FROs will be promoted to

18
the rank of Fire Rescue officer. FROs will’ attend paramedic school at the Department’s
discretion. Fire Rescue officers will be required to pass paramedic school and maintain their
certification as a condition of continued employment with the Dallas Fire-Rescue Department.

ARTICLE 15
EXTRA JOBS FOR CITY PERMITTED SPECIAL EVENTS

This Article applies only to special events permitted under Chapter 42A of the Dallas City Code
(“Special Events Ordinance”). Under this Special Events Ordinance, special event permittees
that are required to provide security and/or emergency medical services at a special event must
hire sworn Dallas Police personnel and sworn Dallas Fire-Rescue personnel. Sworn personnel
working special events will do so in an off-duty capacity in compliance with the Dallas Police
Department General Orders and Code of Conduct or the Dallas Fire-Rescue Rules and
Regulations (whichever applies), except that the parties agree that certain types of special events
regulated under the Special Events Ordinance may be staffed with on-duty sworn personnel, with
the approval of the Chief of Police, the Chief of Dallas F; ire-Rescue, or the City Manager. The
types of special events where on-duty sworn personnel may be used include, but are not limited
to, community-oriented events such as parades; events with a scheduled duration of four hours or
less; events with fewer than 1,000 participants/spectators; and/or events that do not involve the
consumption or sale of alcohol.

ARTICLE 16
TRADE TIME POLICY

It is the intent of the parties that this Article be in accordance with section 7(p)(3) of the FLSA
and 29 C.F.R. 553.31 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

Section 1. Firefighter Provisions.

The Parties agree to maintain, for the duration of this Agreement, the trade time policy currently
in existence in Dallas Fire-Rescue (DFR), which allows an employee to work another
employee’s shift. Under this arrangement, the employee who is working does not receive pay;
rather the employee whose shift is being worked receives the pay.

A substituting firefighter who performs work in the same capacity as the absent firefighter may
agree, solely at his/her option with the City’s approval, to work for the absent firefighter with the
absent officer receiving the pay. The substituting firefighter must work the same capacity and
have the ability to perform the duties the absent firefighter would otherwise regularly perform.
The hours worked by the substituting firefighter will be excluded by the City from the
calculation of the hours for which the substituting firefighter would otherwise be entitled to
compensation. If a firefighter substitutes for another, the absent firefighter will be credited for
the time worked by the substituting firefighter for the hour the substituting firefighter worked for
the absent firefighter. The substituting firefighter must get approval by the absent firefighter’s

19
supervisor before the substitution occurs. Exceptions to this requirement would necessitate the
approval of an Assistant Chief.

Section 2. Police Officer Provisions.

The Parties agree to maintain, for the duration of this Agreement, the trade time policy currently
in existence in the Dallas Police Department (DPD) that will allow an employee to work another
employee’s shift. Under this arrangement, the employee whose shift is being worked will
receive the pay.

A substituting officer who performs work in the same capacity as the absent officer may agree
solely at his or her option with the City’s approval, to work for the absent officer with the absent
officer receiving the pay. The substituting officer must work the same capacity and have the
ability to perform the duties the absent officer would otherwise regularly perform (e.g. patrol
officer for patrol officer, detective for detective). The hours worked by the substituting officer
will be excluded by the City from the calculation of the hours for which the substituting officer
would otherwise be entitled to compensation. If an officer substitutes for another, the absent
officer will be credited as if he or she worked his or her normal work schedule for that shift. The
substituting officer must get approval by the absent officer’s supervisor before the substitution
occurs. Exceptions to this requirement would necessitate the approval of a Bureau Commander.

The maximum number of hours the substituting officer will be allowed to work, including off-
duty jobs, is governed by the number of hours allowed by the off-duty job policy in place at the
time of the substitution. Officers are prohibited from taking leave time in order to work for an
absent officer. Officers will still be required to follow all leave time policies in the City’s
personnel rules and DPD’s General Orders.

ARTICLE 17

CATASTROPIC LEAVE PROGRAM

Section 1. Program Overview.

The Parties agree to establish Catastrophic Leave Program (CLP) for both Dallas Police
Department (DPD) and Dallas Fire-Rescue (DFR) that will allow Officers the opportunity to
assist fellow Officers by making donations of accrued vacation, attendance incentive leave
(AIL), and/or compensatory leave available to Officers in need because of a catastrophic illness
or injury. The City agrees to provide a one-time contribution of 800 hours of leave to this
program to be used for donations to qualifying officers under the approved final guidelines and
procedures.

Designated officers representing Meet and Confer Organizations will be allowed to propose the
program guidelines under which the donated hours are allocated to eligible Officers. Proposed
guidelines will be submitted to the Chief of Police, the Chief of Dallas Fire-Rescue, the City
Attomey’s Office, and the City Manager’s Office who will ultimately approve and adopt the
final procedures and guidelines.

20
The CLP will be implemented no later than 60 days after the final guidelines are approved by the
Chief of Police, the Chief of Dallas Fire-Rescue, the City Attorney’s Office and the City
Manager’s Office.

Section 2. Definitions.
All proposed definitions submitted by the Meet and Confer Organizations for this CLP, including
the definition of a qualifying catastrophic injury or illness, must receive the approval of the Chief

of Police, the Chief of Dallas Fire-Rescue, the City Attorney’s Office, and the City Manager’s
Office.

Section 3. Eligibility.
Eligibility requirements for the CLP include:

1. The Officer requesting hours from the CLP must be a full time Officer who has completed
his or her academy training;

2. The Officer must submit a proper application established under the approved final
guidelines and procedures;

3. The Officer or a qualified family member must be suffering from a catastrophic illness or
injury;

4. The Officer must provide a statement from a licensed physician as required by the approved
final guidelines and procedures;

5. The Officer requesting hours from the CLP must meet any other eligibility requirements as
set forth by the approved final guidelines and procedures.

Section 4. Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) considerations.

This program does not circumvent the application of FMLA nor does it alter or revise any City
procedures for application and use of FMLA.

Applications for FMLA must be submitted in accordance with the provisions of Administrative
Directive 3-72.

Applications for the CLP must be submitted in accordance with the approved final guidelines
and procedures for this program.

The use of the leave hours donated under the CLP will be coordinated with FMLA benefits as set
forth by City procedures and guidelines.

21
Approval or use of catastrophic leave hours will not provide any additional benefits or
entitlements established under federal or state law.

Section 5. Catastrophic Leave Committee.

The review and approval of applications for catastrophic leave must be submitted to a
Catastrophic Leave Committee comprised of at least one (1) representative from each of the
Organizations who are members of the Meet and Confer Team. The Catastrophic Leave
Committee will be responsible for reviewing and approving applications for requested
catastrophic leave hours as set forth in the approved final guidelines.

Section 6, Guidelines.
Specific stipulations of the guidelines to be established must include the following:

e Only vacation, AIL, and compensatory leave hours may be donated.

e The minimum amount of accumulated leave time an Officer may contribute is two (2)
hours.

e No transfer of monetary value will occur from the donation but only hours as contributed
by the donating Officer.

© A Contributing Officer’s accrued leave balance will be reduced by the number of leave
hours donated by that Officer.

© Direct donation to specific Officers is not permissible.

e All donations must be made to the CLP and allocated to eligible Officers according to
approved final guidelines and procedures.

© Donated leave hours contributed to an eligible Officer will become part of the Officer’s
estate in the event of his or her death.

e Allocation of hours from the CLP can be made available only to those Officers who have
completely exhausted all accumulated leave time (accrued sick and vacation leave, AIL,
compensatory time) and who are not otherwise receiving any related compensable
benefits such as disability or workers’ compensation.

e The maximum allocation allowed for use by any eligible Officer is four hundred (400)
hours per qualifying injury or illness.

© The Catastrophic Leave Committee will render a decision to the applying Officer within
timelines established in the approved final guidelines and procedures.

22
e Provisions for membership and terms of Catastrophic Leave Committee members will be
set forth in the approved final guidelines and procedures.

¢ All Catastrophic Leave Committee members must complete HIPAA training in order to
serve on the Committee and must execute a confidentiality agreement.

ARTICLE 18
TAKE HOME VEHICLE PROGRAM

Administrative Directive 6-2, Fleet and Equipment Utilization, requires that police officers using
City vehicles for call back responsibilities who live more than 25 miles from their work address
find an alternate storage location on City property for the vehicle rather than taking the vehicle to
their home. Under this Agreement, police officers who take home vehicles on a rotating basis for
call back purposes will be allowed to take the vehicle to their homes if they live within 30 miles
of the Central Patrol Division. The 30 miles will be measured using a straight line from the
Officers residence to the Central Patrol Division rather than using mapping software that
calculates driving distance. Police officers who live further than 30 miles from the Central Patrol
Division will still be required to find an alternate storage location on City property as outlined by
the Administrative Directive.

ARTICLE 19
MERIT PAY STEP ELIGIBILITY

Under this Agreement, Police Officers who are otherwise eligible to receive a merit pay step and
who receive disciplinary action(s) totaling more than a three-day suspension issued after October
1, 2013 will not receive a merit step pay increase when the disciplinary action(s) occurs within
one (1) year of their merit eligibility date. This change is effective October 1, 2013. This Article
does not modify any merit pay step increase requirements in place for the period prior to October
1, 2013, and is only related to losing a merit pay step based on disciplinary action(s). Police
Officers must still meet established performance standards to qualify for a merit pay step
increase. This Article does not provide for merit pay steps in any years other than in FY2013-
2014, FY2014-2015, and FY2015-2016.

ARTICLE 20
MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN PAY AND BENEFITS
Section 1. —_ As set forth in written City or Department rules and procedures as of September
30, 2013, the following programs and/or pay will remain unchanged except as modified by the

Meet and Confer Agreement of 2010 and this Agreement for the duration of this Agreement:

Education Incentive Pay
Language Skills Assignment Pay

23
TCLEOSE Certification Pay

Aircraft Rescue (ARFF) Assignment Pay

TCFP Firefighter and Fire Inspector Certification Pay

Arson Investigator Assignment Pay

EMS Assignment Pay

Hazardous Material Response Team (HAZMAT) Assignment Pay

Fire Instructor Assignment Pay

Paramedic Certification Pay

Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) Assignment Pay

Swift Water Assignment Pay (Effective October 1, 2013 as established under Article 9 of
this Agreement)

Detective Assignment Pay

Police - Field Training officer Assignment Pay (including and in addition to the 0.6 hours
of overtime pay for training and 1.0 hours of overtime pay to complete the DOR and End
of Phase Evaluation Report)

Narcotics Hazardous Material Interdiction Team Assignment Pay

Patrol Duty Assignment Pay

Retention Incentive Pay, not including the retention incentive pay provided for newly
hired Officers when steps were not reinstated that was included in the 2010 Meet &
Confer Agreement

Longevity Pay

Down Payment Assistance Program

Shift Assignment Pay

Mileage Reimbursement

Costs of Uniforms

Costs of Ballistic Vests

Costs of Reflective Vests

Costs of Wet Weather Items

Costs of Cold Weather Items

Costs of Duty Gear

Costs of Duty Weapons and Ammunition

Costs of Personal Protective Equipment

Costs of SCBA/Face Pieces

Free parking at work stations (except that Officers will continue to pay parking at City

facilities currently requiring payment, including but not limited to Dallas City Hall, the

Jack Evans Police Building, Dallas Convention Center)

Parking Reimbursement

Costs of Cellular Telephones for Assigned Personnel

Minimum Call Back Time, In-Service Training Pay, and

Off-Duty Standby Travel Time

DPD Minimum Court Time Policy

DPD sick leave policy

DPD vacation leave accrual policy

DPD policy for police officers permanently restricted from the performance patrols

DER Reassignment Policy (Work Location Assignment), effective the date of ratification

of Meet and Confer through September 30, 2016.

24
Section2. The City may change any part of the health benefits program including, but not
limited to, plan design, coverage, co-pays, deductibles, premiums, out-of-pocket maximums, and
provider networks for Officers to the extent that the same changes are applied to the health
benefits programs offered to all other City employees.

Section 3. The protection of the pay and benefits listed in this Article is the sole purpose of
this Article. No other aspects of wages, benefits or other conditions of employment are protected
under this Article.

ARTICLE 21
LIMITATIONS AND EXCLUSIONS OF AGREEMENT

Section 1: Notwithstanding any provision in the entirety of this Agreement, neither this
Agreement nor any provision of this Agreement makes any statute, ordinance, charter provision
or other written rule, order, or policy a contract or a contractual obligation. In particular,
notwithstanding any provision in the entirety of this Agreement, nothing in this Agreement
grants any rights or imposes any obligations based wholly or partly, or directly or indirectly, on
City of Dallas Ordinance No. 16084 (1979) or any resolution implementing the ordinance.
Nothing in this Agreement waives the City's governmental immunity from suit or liability in any
action asserting a right or claim based wholly or partly, or directly or indirectly, on City of
Dallas Ordinance No. 16084 or any resolution implementing the ordinance. Nothing in this
Agreement waives any arguments, rights, or claims asserted, or that could be asserted, by any
claimants or plaintiffs, in any now existing litigation based wholly or partly, or directly or
indirectly, on City of Dallas Ordinance No. 16084 or any resolution implementing the ordinance.
Nothing in this Agreement waives any defenses, rights, or remedies asserted, or that could be
asserted, by any defendants in any pending or future litigation based wholly or partly, or directly
or indirectly, on City of Dallas Ordinance No. 16084 or any resolution implementing the
ordinance. No Article of this Agreement, other than this Article 21 applies retroactively or
otherwise affects any pending or future litigation involving City of Dallas Ordinance No. 16084.

Section2. — Notwithstanding any provision in the entirety of this Agreement, this Agreement
is made for the sole benefit of the Parties. No other person or entity shall have any rights or
remedies under or by reason of this Agreement, nor shall anything in this Agreement be
construed to confer upon any person or entity, whether or not a Party to this Agreement, the
rights or remedies of a third-party beneficiary. This Agreement is enforceable only by the
Parties to this Agreement and only in the manner provided in section 147.007 of the Texas Local
Government Code and by no other provision of federal or state law.

ARTICLE 22
COMPLETE AGREEMENT
Section 1, — The Parties agree that each has had the full and unrestricted right and opportunity

to make, advance, and discuss all matters properly within the province of bargaining for a Meet
and Confer Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the full and complete Agreement of the

25
Parties and there are no other terms or agreements, oral or written, except as herein contained.
No alteration, amendment or variation of this Agreement’s terms shall bind the Parties unless
made, executed and voted on by the Parties as required by Chapter 147 of the Texas Local
Government Code. A failure of the City or Meet and Confer Team to insist in any one or more
instances upon performance of any terms or condition of this Agreement shall not be considered
as a waiver or relinquishment of the right of the City or the Meet and Confer Team to future
performance of any such term or condition, and the obligations of the City and the Meet and
Confer Team to such future performance shall continue in full force and effect.

ARTICLE 23
SAVINGS CLAUSE
Section 1. Savings Clause.

Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be inoperative, void or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect for the duration of this Agreement, it being the intention of the Parties that no portion of
this Agreement or provision herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the invalidity of
any other portion or provision.

Section 2. Preemption of Statutes and Ordinances.

The provisions of this Agreement shall supersede and preempt the provisions of any statute, or
local ordinance which is in conflict with any provision of this Agreement and the procedures
developed hereunder, including for example and not by way of limitation, any contrary
provisions of Chapters 141, 142, or 147 of the Texas Local Government Code. This preemption
provision is authorized by Section 147.011 of the Texas Local Government Code, and the parties
have expressly agreed that each and every provision involving or creating such a conflict shall
have the effect of superseding the statutory standard or result which would otherwise obtain, in
the absence of this Agreement. This provision is of the essence to the bargain and agreement
which has been reached.

Section 3. Change in Authorized Representative.

During the term of this Agreement, if there is a petition for withdrawal of recognition of the
Meet and Confer Team pursuant to Section 147.0034 of the Texas Local Government Code, then
it will be the City’s option to continue the terms of this Agreement or to cancel the Agreement.
In addition, the City may withdraw recognition as provided by the petition, or order a
certification election in accordance with Section 147.0032 regarding whether to do so.

ARTICLE 24

DURATION AND TERMINATION

Section 1. | This Agreement shall be effective as of the date the City Council passes a
resolution ratifying this Agreement. All pay increases, leave, or changes in benefits, shall be

26
implemented in accordance with the respective timelines outlined herein. This Agreement shall
remain in effect until the 30th day of September, 2016, or until such time as it is superseded by a
new Agreement between the Parties, whichever occurs later, provided however, that in no event
shall this Agreement continue in effect after March 3 1, 2017.

Section 2. The Parties to this Agreement may mutually agree in advance to enter into
negotiations to amend this Agreement before the expiration date, provided that the Parties shall
meet on or before January 15, 2016, to amend, renew, or extend this Agreement.

 

Section3. The City presently intends to continue this Agreement each fiscal year through its
term, to pay all payments due, and to fully and promptly perform all of the obligations of the
City under this Agreement. All obligations of the City shall be paid only out of current revenues,
reasonably anticipated and appropriated for such purpose by the City Council, in compliance
with the Texas Constitution, Article XI, Sections 5 and 7. In the event that the City cannot meet
its funding obligations, as provided in the State Constitution, this entire Agreement becomes null
and void. In the event the City Council fails to appropriate funds in any fiscal year of this
Agreement in an amount sufficient to meet City obligations hereunder, this Agreement shall
terminate and shall be null and void in its entirety on the first date that such funding is not met
pursuant to this Agreement. If at any time during the term of this Agreement, or any extension
thereof, the electorate of the City subjects the Government of the City to a rollback election; and,
as a result of such rollback election, the City suffers a reduction in revenues due to a reduction in
the tax rate, the Meet and Confer Team agrees to reopen the salary and other compensation
provisions of this Agreement for the purpose of renegotiating the same. If sixty (60) calendar
days after these negotiations begin, no agreement has been reached; this Agreement shall
terminate and be null and void in its entirety.

ARTICLE 25
NOTICE

Except as otherwise provided herein, any notice, demand, request or other communication
hereunder given or made by either Party to the other shall be in writing and shall be deemed to
be delivered whether actually received or not, when deposited in the United States mail, postage
prepaid, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the Parties hereto at the respective
addresses set out below, or at such other address as they may provide by written notice to the
other Party.

A. If to City: B. Ifto Meet & Confer Team:
A.C. Gonzalez Michael Pottorff
Interim City Manager Chairman Meet & Confer Team
Dallas City Hall, 4DN 1414 North Washington Street
Dallas, Texas 75201. Dallas, Texas 75204
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, THE PARTIES HAVE CAUSED TO HAVE THIS AGREEMENT
TO BE SIGNED BY THEIR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES ON THIS
DAY OF 2013.

CITY OF DALLAS

A.C, Gonzalez
Interim City Manager
MEET AND CONFER TEAM

 

Shawn Gary
President
Dallas Black Fire Fighters Association

Dyron Tyler
Representative
Dallas Black Fire Fighters Association

 

Joe Veracruz
President
Dallas Hispanic Fire Fighters Association

Sal Morales
Representative
Dallas Hispanic Fire Fighters Association

G. Doug Dickerson
President
Dallas Fire Fighters Association

Scott Clumpner
Representative
Dallas Fire Fighters Association
Cletus Judge
President
Black Police Officers Association

Willie Ford
Representative
Black Police Officers Association

Roberto Arredondo
President
National Latino Peace Officers Association.

Raul Galvan
Representative
National Latino Peace Officers Association

Michael Walton

President

Dallas Fraternal Order of Police
Lodge 588

Michael Pottortf
Representative

Dallas Fraternal Order of Police
Lodge 588
Ron Pinkston
President
Dallas Police Association

Brad Uptmore
Representative
Dallas Police Association

31
ATTACHMENT A
UNIFORMED POLICE SALARY SCHEDULE FY2013-2014

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLASS GRADE-| CLASS [GRADE
CODE RANK ‘STEP. MONTH | ANNUAL ‘CODE BANK ‘STEP. MONTH | ANNUAL
{46101 [Police Oficer Trainee | P21 | $3578 | $42,941 46011 [Police Sergeant, Stan | P4-1| $4,206 | $50,713

46102 [Police Oficer Trainee i P2-1 | $3,578 | $42,941 46011 [Police Sergeant, 1 Year__| P4-2| $4,505 | $54.42
46103 [Police Officer Trainee Il P2-1 | $3,578 | $42,941 46011 [Police Sergeant. t Year| P4-3| $4,762 | $57,140

46011 [Police Sergeant. 1 Year| P4-4| $5,000 | $59,995
46004 [Police Officer P2-1 | sa576 | $42,944 46011 [Police Sergeant, t Year| P4-5| $5,250 | $62,999
46004 [Police Officer, 1 Year P2-2 [$3,756 | $45.067 46011 [Police Sergeant, 1 Year| P4-6| $5512 | $66,138
“46004 Police Officer, 1 Year P2-3 | $3,943 | $47,314 46011 [Police Sergeant, 1 Year| P4-7| $5,789 | $69,466,
“46004 [Police Officer, 1 Year P24 | $4,142 | $49,700 46011 [Police Sergeant, t Year| P4-6 | 36.078 | $72,936
‘46004 [Police Officer, 1 Year 2-5 | $4.348 | $52,176 46011 [Police Sergeant, 1 Year| P4-9 | $6.981 | $76,576
46004 [Police Officer, 1 Year P2-6 | $4,565 | $54,780 ‘46011 [Police Sergeant, | Year__|P4-10| $6,700 | $80,405
46004 [Police Officer, 1 Year P2-7 | $4,795 | $57,538 46011 [Police Sergeant P4-11| $7,035 | $84,425
“46004 [Police Officer, 1 Year P2-8 | $5,033 | $60,396
“46004 [Police Officer, 1 Year P2-9 | $5,285 | $63,420 76013 [Police Lieutenant. Stat | P5-7 | $4637 | 355.649)
“46004 Police Officer. 1 Year 2-10 $5,550 | $66.596 46013 [Police Lieutenant, 1 Year | P5-2| $4,968 | $59,617
45004 [Police Officer 2-11 | $5,827 | $69.921 “46013 [Police Lieutenant, 1 Year | P5-3| $5216 | $62,593,

46013 [Police Lieutenant, 1 Year | P5-4| $5,478 | $65,734
46005 __|Police Corporal, Year P24 | $4,142 | $49,700 46013 [Police Lieutenant, 1 Year | P5-5 | $5,752 | $69,018
46005__|Police Corporal, Year 2-5 | $4348 | $52,176 46013 [Police Lieutenant, 1 Year | P5-6 | $6,099 | 72.467
46005 __|Police Corporal, 1Year P2-6 | $4,565 | $54,780 46013 _[Police Lieutenant, 1 Year | P5-7| $6,340 | $76,080
“46005 [Police Corporal, 1Year P2-7 | $4,795 | $57,598 46013 [Police Lieutenant, 1 Year_| P5-8 | $6657 | $79,883
'46005__|Police Corporal, 1 Year 2-8 | $5,033 | $60,396 | [46013 |Police Lieutenant, 1 Year | P5-9| $6,990 | $03,675
“46005 [Police Corporal. 1 Year 2-9 | $5,265 | $63,420 46013 [Police Lieutenant, 1 Year_|P5- 10] $7.339_| $88,068

{748005 [Police Corporal, 1 Year P2-10[ $5,550 | $66.596 46013 [Police Lieutenant 5-11] $7,706 | $92,471

46005 [Police Corporal P2-11| $5.827 | $69,921 t

46014 [Police Captain, Start 6-1 | $5,088 | $61,056
46016 [Police Senior Comporal, Start 3-1 | $3,679 | $44,150 46014 [Police Captain, 1 Year| P6-2| $5451 | $65,409)
“46016 [Police Senior Corporal, 1 Year| P3-2 | $3.876 | $46,511 46014 [Police Captain, 1 Year| P6-3| $5.72 _| $68,663
“46016 [Police Senior Corporal. 1 Year| P3-3 | $4.142 | $49,700 46014 [Police Captain, t Year | P6-4 | $6,009 | $72,112
46016 _|Police Senior Corporal, 1 Year__| P3-4 | $4348 | $52,176 46014 [Police Captain, 1Year__| P6-5 | $6311 | $75,730
46016 [Police Senior Corporal, 1 Year| P3-5 | $4565 | $54,760 46014 [Police Captain, 1 Year| P6-6 | $6,625 | $79,505,
‘46016 {Police Senior Corporal, 1 Year __| P3-6 | $4,795 | $57,538 46014 [Police Captain, 1 Year| P6-7 | $6.956 | $63,473,
‘46016 [Police Senior Corporal, 1 Year| P3-7 | $5,033 | $60,396 46014 [Police Captain, 1 Year| P6-8| $7305 | $87,657
‘46016 [Police Senior Corporal, 1 Year| P3-8 | $5,285 | $63,420 46014 {Police Captain, 1 Year| P6-9 | $7,671 | $92,047,
46016 [Police Senior Comporal, 1 Year| P3-9 | $5.549 | $66,585 46014 [Police Captain, 1 Year| P6-10| $8,054 | $96,649
“46016 [Police Senior Corporal, 1 Year| P3-10| $5,827 | $69,921 46014 [Police Captain 6-11] $8456 | $101,481
“46016_|Police Senior Corporal. 1 Year__| P3-11| $6118 | $73.418
"46016 [Police Senior Corporal P3_ 12] $6,424 | $77,089

 

 

 

 

‘The number of years indicated beside the Rank indicate the minimum number of years that an officer must be in the Step prior to being eligible for the next Step in
the Rank. Ifofficers are not given a step pay increase mn any fiscal year for budgetary reasons, when step pay increases are resumed in a subsequent fiscal year, it
1s expected that officers’ pay will only merease one step (if they meet the eligibiity requiteents). Officers should not espect a double-step i order to make up for
step increases not previously given for budgetary reasons in any fiscal year.

we

6
ATTACHMENT B
UNIFORMED FIRE SALARY SCHEDULE FY2013-2014

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
 
 

——
CLASS GRADE- CLASS GRADE-
‘CODE RANK ‘step | MONTH | annual || Cone RANK eee | MONTH.
44101 _|Fire & Rescue Officer Tanea | F2-1 [$3,578 $42,541 _| [44006 [Fire Lieutenant, Stat Fa-1_| $4206
44102 |Fire & Rescue Officer Trainee I F2-1 $3,578 | $42,941_| | 44006 [Fire Lieutenant 1 Yr Fa-2 | $4535
44103 [Fire & Rescue Oficer Trainee ll Fe-1 | $3578 | $42,941 | | 44006 _|Fire Lieutenant_1 Yr Fa-3 | $4,762
440068 [Fire Lieutenant, 1 Yr. F4-4 | $5,000
44002 _|Fire & Rescue Officer, Start (Prob Compl) | F2-1 | $3.578__| $42941_| |"44006 [Fire Lieutenant. 1 Yr Fa-5 | $5,250
44002 [Fire & Rescue Officer, 1 Yr F2-4 | $3,756 | $45,067 | [44006 [Fire Lieutenant. 1 Yr F4-6 | $5512
44002 [Fire & Rescue Officer. 1 Yr 2-7 | $3,943 | $47,314 | [44006 [Fire Lieutenant. 1 Yr Fa-7 | $5,789
44002 [Fire & Rescue Oficer, 1 ¥r F2-8” [34,142 [$49,700 _| (“44006 [Fire Leutenant, 1 Yr Fa-8 | $6,078
44002 [Fire & Rescue Oficer, 1¥r F2-3° | $4,348 [$52,176 _| {44006 [Fire Lieutenant_1 Yr Fa-9 | $6,981
44002 "|Fire & Rescue Officer. 1 Yr F2-10 [34.565 | $54,780 | (“44006 [Fire Lieutenant, 1 Yr 4-10 | $6,700
44002 [Fire & Rescue Officer, 1 Vr F2-11 | $4795 |” $57,538_| | “44006 [Fire Leutenant 4-11 | 87,035
44002 |Fire & Rescue Oficer, 1 Yr F212 [5.033 | $60,386
44002 _|Fire & Rescue Oficer, 1 Vr 2-13 [$5,285 [$63,420 | |“44007_[Fire Captain, Stan F5-1 | sear
44002 [Fire & Rescue Officer, 1¥r F214 [$5,550 [$66,596 _| [44007 [Fire Captain. 1 Yr. F5-2 | $4,968
44002 |Fire & Rescue Oficer F218 | $5,827 [$69,921 F5-3_ | $5216
44007 Fire Captain. 1 Yr F5-4 | $5,478
[as [Fire Second Diver, Stat F2-2 {$3610 | $43,322_| “44007 [Fire Captain. 1 Yr F5-5 | $5,752
44026 [Fire Second Driver, 1 Yr Fa-5 [$3,773 | $45.279_| |~44007 [Fire Captain. 1 Ye F5-6 | $6,039
44026 [Fire Second Onver. 1 Yr 2-7 | $3,943 | s47.314_| | 44007_[Fire Captain, 1 Yr F5-7 | $6,340
44036 [Fire Second Driver, 1 Yr F2-8 | 4,42 | $49.700_| | “24007 [Fire Captain, 1 Yr F5-8 | $6,657
44026 [Fire Second Driver, 1 Yr. F2-9 | $4348 | 952.176 _| [44007 [Fire Captain, 1 Yr F5-9 | $6,990
44028 |Fre Second Driver, 1 Yr F2-10 [34,565 [$54,760 | | 44007 [Fire Captain, 1¥r F5-10 | $7,338
44026 [Fire Second Driver, 1 Yr F2-11 [$4705 | $57,538 | ("44007 [Fire Captain. F5-11_|_ $7,708
44026 [Fire Second Dnver, 1 Yr 2-12 | $5,033_| $60,396
44026 [Fire Second Dnver, 1 Yr. F2-13 | $5,285 [$63,420 | [44008 _[Fire Gattalion/ Section Chief, Stat Fe-1_| 35.088
44026 [Fire Second Drver, 1 ¥r F2-14 [35,550 [$66,596 _| “44008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chief 1 Yr Fe-2 | $5,451
44026 |Fire Second Driver F2-15 [35.827 | 69,921] | “24008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chief Yr. F6-3 [$5,722
44008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chiet, 1 Yr. 6-4 | $6,009
“#4004 __|Fire Diver - Engineer, Star 3-1 [733679 [$44 750_| | 24008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chief 1¥r Fe-5 | $6311
44004 [Fire Driver - Engineer, 1 Yr F3-2 {7 s3876 | $46.511_| |" 44008 |Fire Battalion / Section Chiet, 1 Yr F6-6 | $6,625
44004 [Fire Driver - Engineer, 1 ¥r F3-3 [$4142 |" $49,700 _| |~44008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chiet, 1 Yr F6-7 | $6,956
44004 [Fire Driver - Engineer, + Yr Fa 47 4348 | $52,176] | “44008 _|Fire Battalion / Section Chiet, 1 ¥r F6-8 | $7,305
44004 |Fire Driver - Engneer, 1 Yr F3-5" [$4565 [$54,780 | | "44008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chet, 1 Vr F6-9 | 87.671
44004 [Fire Drver- Engineer, 1 YF 36 | $4,795 [$57,538 _| [44008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chief 1 Yr F6-10 | $8,054
44004 [Fire Driver Engineer, 1 Yr F3-7 | 35.033 [$60,396 | [24008 [Fire Battalion / Section Chief Feit | $8,456
44004 [Fire Driver - Engineer, 1 Yr F3—8 |~ $5,285 | $63,420
44004 [Fire Driver - Engineer_1 Yr Fa-9 [$5549 | 366.565
44004 |Fire Driver - Engineer. 1 Yr Fa-10 [$5627 | $69,921
44004 [Fire Driver - Engneer, 1 ¥r F3-i1 | $6118_| 373.418
44004 [Fire Drver- Engineer F3-12 | se42a_| 77.089
Jr gumber of years ict bese the Rank mts hs minimum numberof vers thst nfs must bein the Sip porto bvingelgble forthe mex Step in the Rank, Uf offices aot gen astep pov ins m ny
sa] use for budgetary reasons, when ssp pay nates a resumed pa subsequent fsed ver. expt thal offices pay willomlyincwate one ssp if they mes the clibilty quran) OMe shoud not expect

 

 

!adouble-step wm order to make up for step increases not previously ven for budgetary watons many fiscal year

33
ATTACHMENT B

UNIFORMED FIRE SALARY SCHEDULE FY2013-2014

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

  
   

  

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[PREVENTION
[ CLASS ‘GRADES [SASS] GRADES
| cope RANK sige | monty | annua | STEP.
44016 _|Fire Prevention Captain, Start F5-4 $4,637 $55,649
[aor ee eT moe ee a ie ier
44202 [Fire Prevention Officer Trainee Ii F2-1 $3,578 $42,941 44016 _ [Fire Prevention Captain, 1 Yr. F5-3 $5,216 $62,593,
44203 _|F re Prevention Oficer Trance i #21 [$3,578] s42.941_| [44016 [Fite Prevention Captain, 1 Yr. F5-4 | $5,478 | $65,734
44016 [Fire Prevention Captain, Yr F5-5 | $5,752 | $69,018
74005 _|Fire Prevention Officer, Start F223 | sa673 | $44, 180_| [44016 [Fire Prevention Captain. 1 Yr. 5-6 | 36039 _| 72.467
44005 [Fire Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F2-6 $3,876 $46,511 44016 [Fire Prevention Captain. 1 Yr. F5-7 $6,340, $76,080.
44005 _ [Fire Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F2-8 $4,142, $49,700 44016 _|Fire Prevention Captain, 1 Yr. FS-8 $6,657 $79,883.
“44005 [Fire Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F2-9 $4,348 $52,176 44016 _|Fire Prevention Captain, 1 Yr. F5-9 $6,990 $83,875
44005 [Fire Prevention Officer. 1 Yr. F2-10 | $4565 | $54,7¢0_| 44016 _|Fire Prevention Captain, 1 Ye F510 | $7,339] $88,068
44005 _|Fire Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F2-11_| $4,795 | $57,538 _| | 44016 [Fire Prevention Captain FS. 11 | $7,706 | $92,471
E “44005 [Fire Prevention Offcer, Tr F212 | _$6.033 | $60,396
"44005 [Fire Prevention Officer. 4 Yr. F2-13 | $5,285 | $63,420 L
44005 [Fire Prevention Officer, 1 Yr F2-14 $5,550. $66,596 44025 _|Fire Prevention Section Chief, Start F6-1 $5,088_ $61,058.
44005 __|Fire Prevention Officer F2-15 | $5,827 | $69,921 _| | 44025 |Fire Prevention Section Ctiet, 1 Yr. F6-2 35,451 | $65,409
44025 [Fire Prevention Section Chief Yr] _F6-3 | $5,722 | $68,653
44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Officer, Start F3-1 $3679, ‘$44,150 44025 _|Fire Prevention Section Chief, 1 Yr. F6-4 $6,009. $72,412
44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. #3227 $3,876 | 846.511] | 44025 [Fire Prevention Section Chet 1¥r | F6-5 | seat |" $75,730
44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Officer. Yr. F323 [$4 142] $49,700] [744025 ]Fire Prevention Section Chief tvr__{ FS-6 | $6,625 | $79,505
“44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Omcer. 1 Yr F324 [$4340 | $62,176 | [44025 [Fire Provontion Section Crist, 1 Ye $6,955 [$03,473
4404 [Fir Senior Prevention Officer. £36 | 4.565 | s54.780_| ("44025 [Fire Prevertion Section Chet ¥r 37,305 | $67,657
44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F3-6 $4,795 $57,538 44025 _|Fire Prevention Section Chief. 1 Yr. $7,671 $92,047
44014 _|Fire Senior Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F3-7 $5,033, $60,396, “44025 _ [Fire Prevention Section Chief_1 Yr. $96,649
44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F3-8 ‘$5,285, $63,420 44025 _|Fire Prevention Section Chief $101,481
44014 _|Fire Senior Prevention Officer. 1 Yr. F3-9 $5,549. $66,585
44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Officer. 1 Yr. F3-10 $5,827, $69,921
44014 [Fire Senior Prevention Officer, 1 Yr. F3-411 $6.118 $73,418
44014 _|Fire Senior Prevention Officer F3-12 $6,424 ‘$77,089
“O75 _|Fie Prevention Lewterant, Stat Fat | ame | STS
44015 [Fire Prevention Lieutenant, 1 Yr. Fa -2 34,535 $54,421
44015 [Fire Prevention Lieutenant. 1 Yr. F4-3 $4,762 $57,140
44015 [Fire Prevention Lieutenant. 1 Yr F4-4 [$6,000 | $59,995
44015 [Fire Prevention Lieutenant,1 Yr. F4-5 | $5,250 | $62,999
44015 _[Fire Prevention Leutenant, TY, Fa-6 | $5,512 | $66,138
“44015 [Fire Prevention Leutenant, 1 Yr Fa-7| $5,769 | 369.466
44015 [Fire Prevention Lieutenant. 1 Yr. F4-8 $6,078 $72,938.
“44015 [Fire Prevention Leutenant, 1 Yr F4-9 | $6,361] $76,576
44015 _|Fire Prevention Lieutenant, 1_Yr. Fa -10 $6,700, $80,404
44015 [Fire Prevention Leutenant F411 | _s7.035 | $34,424

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

liscal year for budyslary rearans, when step pay increases are resumed in a subsequer
|, double-sicp inorder to make up for slop increases not previously wren (or buds ceasons m any fiscal x ea,

34,

she number of years yndcated beside the Rank indicate the nunumum number of years that an officer must be im the Step prior to being cigble for the ex Step m the Rank, { officers are not given a sep pay werease in aay
nt fiscal years expected that olfieers pay will only inetease ove step (they meet the sligbility requires), O1fccrs should not expect

   
