COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT

BY AND BETWEEN
LOUISVILLE/JEFFERSON COUNTY METRO GOVERNMENT
AND
RIVER CITY
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
LODGE #614,

POLICE OFFICER AND SERGEANTS

EXPIRATION DATE: JUNE 30, 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE .....sccccecsesessessesssesesecsesseesscsesseessenesseesecssesssecsneseesecseessesssnesuessessenssnssnssnesecsessersesssssessecsenesseanes 1
ARTICLE 1 - RECOGNITION ...c.csccceessessseesseessteetesseessssssesssesssssecssessecsseasscsusssecsuesneesssessecsseesnsenseneene 1
ARTICLE 2 - SCOPE o.essesscessesssessessssessecsesessessssesnseseesnecscsnsesnesuneseessecssesnsesessaressesssesnessaesseessessesessnesee 1
ARTICLE 3 - SUBORDINATION ......cssscssssssstsssseseesseessesseessecsnssseesseesecansasecsuscsscsneenessesssansssesneeneeneenes 2
ARTICLE 4 - METRO GOVERNMENT RIGHTS ......ccssesssessssssesesecseessecssesseesssssesseesseessesseseseeseesnense 2
ARTICLE 5 - NONDISCRIMINATION......:ccsscsssssssesssssssecsnssseseesssseencssessnessesenessessessueessesaneseneeneasessee 3
ARTICLE 6 - MUTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND PROHIBITION OF STRIKES ......cccscescsesstessesseeoee 3
ARTICLE 7 - LODGE SECURITY .....csssesssesssssssessssesesssecseeesessseseessessesssecsnssareseesavesseecaesssensvesseaseseeeas 4
ARTICLE 8 - LODGE BUSINESS .....csscesssesssesssesseessesssesseesseessecseesiesssesnessscsnseneesueesersseessesesmeenseseeseses 5
ARTICLE 9 - SENIORITY ......csscesssessesssesstscssecsseesnessecsnsssesssecsesenstsesssecsessuccsaceneeseeesessuesaneenessneeseeaeeane 8
ARTICLE 10 - ASSIGNMENTS. ....cccscecssesssesssssstscsssssessessesssessnsesueascasessecsuesseessessesetessesssnesseesessnsensese 9
ARTICLE 11 - PROMOTIONAL VACANCIES ......ccsccsssesseessessnesseessersecsesesesenseseessessneessesssnesseeneenees 11
ARTICLE 12 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ........csscesscsssessseessesseesnesseesesesnessesanesseeseessneessenniesnene et ee ll
ARTICLE 13 - STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE .....csscsscssessessestessesessesseseesessenneesesneneaees 13
ARTICLE 14 - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT ......c.sccssessseeseesnesseesnecseesnesseesnessnecssessneeanseneenees 13
ARTICLE 15 - HEALTH AND SAFETY ....sccsscessesscesssecsecssessesensssessssesesssecssssessnessecssnessesseesennennes 14
ARTICLE 16 - MILITARY LEAVES ...cscscsssesseseesesesssesssssesesnesseeseseesssssssesssseesessesscssesscseesneesseaseans 14
ARTICLE 17 - DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE AND BILL OF RIGHTS .......ccscssssseessesseeseesees 15
ARTICLE 18 - PERSONNEL FILES ..0..ecscesssessessssssecssessessneesesesecseessecsecsnecsessneesessecsseessesneesesnesnes 20
ARTICLE 19 - TRANSFER RIGHTS .....ccssccssssssesssesssssseeseessessnessessecssesnecscseeesesseeeseesnesanessuneeaesneenee 22
ARTICLE 20 ~ RESIDENCY .....ccssesssessessessseesseessesecsseesecsnssscssnsessessecsecsnsesecsuseneesneasenesaeessmeeseeseeses 23
ARTICLE 21 - MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS .....cccscessesssesseessesseeeseesneesecseeeseessneessessaseeseaneanee 23
ARTICLE 22 - VEHICLE INSURANCE ......cccsssssssssessssseeseesesseesessesesceseesssnssessessesessneseeseaneeneeseseesses 23

ARTICLE 23 - LEGAL PROTECTION .....c.sccscessssssseeseessessessessesneeneseeneaesseaneseenensenessesnseneensensensenenaes 23
ARTICLE 24 - SALARY SCHEDULE... cssccscesssesecssesseseesssseeseeseessenssneseseessensanenessesusessseenneeseeessees 24
ARTICLE 25 - PENSION ....c..cscssessessessesesensssesecseescenecsecsessecssesseseeseanecnsanssecsssuesesasencsnesessecasencaneeseanes 25
ARTICLE 26 - COURT PAY ...cccssesesssssessesssssessesnessenecnecsussessnesecnnenesseenssssesneancaneneensauesneeneaenneenerassnes 25
ARTICLE 27 - OVERTIME ...c.scscsssssssssessssessesssesssssseesscsnsonessssussvesesecseaseeneseesesuesnesssuesssesssueenecaneseenses 25
ARTICLE 28 - SPECIAL DUTY PAY ...csccescssssssssestssseeseesssseseesessesseeseseessesssnsseeaserssnesessssetaneeseseesess 27
ARTICLE 29 - SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT PAY... .ccsssessessssssesssseeseeseesesnesessesssreasenssnessesesseaneeneeneanes 27
ARTICLE 30 - PAID AND UNPAID LEAVES ....cscscessssssessesssssesecsesseessesesseseeseesescsseessesneseeseesseneenaes 27
ARTICLE 31 - SICK LEAVE o...ceccesssseesessesseessesessssecsnssucsneanesnssnssnesessnesceneaesseneanesesueesecsesaseneeseessenses 29
ARTICLE 32 - IN-LINE-OF-DUTY INJURIES AND DEATH IN-LINE-OF-DUTY .......cecsseseees 31
ARTICLE 33 - HEALTH INSURANCE .....ssecssesssesseesssscssesstessssssseseesseeseesseessesseeseesesnsessecseessneesensess 32
ARTICLE 34 - CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCES .....esccscesssesseeseeseesteestecsneestessiess 33
ARTICLE 35 - LIFE INSURANCE .....cscecsessecssssesseseesessscsnecsssessesneseeseescsuearesssessecstsnsessereeasessssesseesees 34
ARTICLE 36 - TUITION BENEFITS ........csccsscscssseesessesseesesseeseeseesesesseseeseeesnesseseessssessesssseeseessnesees 34
ARTICLE 37 - PERSONAL PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT .......scsssesseessessesstessesesessseeseeeseesneeee 34
ARTICLE 38 - GENDER ....cescscsscessssssseesesseseessssesseseeseesesneseesesseesesessrsosseesseseeesseesvsseessssessessnssnesessees 35
ARTICLE 39 - ENTIRE AGREEMENT .......ccsccsessesssssesseesessesseesesseeussncssessenssesseessenesecsucsneasssesenseessess 35
ARTICLE 40 - TERM..v.scssecsessessessssesseeseesserssecssceseseessesessecnseseesessesasenseveesenssnssessenssevesessesssaeseeeaseessees 35
APPENDIX | - DRUG TESTING POLICY AND PROCEDURES........cccseeseesessesessesseesteseeseenees 37
APPENDIX 2 - WAGE AND LONGEVITY SCHEDULE ......ceccscsssssscssesseseeseesessessesseeeesesseeseenes 44
APPENDIX 3 - LEASE u.ecsessssssssessssseseessescsnessssessesssnesssnesussussnsanssneeesesessessessessssnessesessssssessseseseeseaneenses i
PREAMBLE

THIS COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT, entered into this a day of

Yel , 2013, by and between Louisville-Jefferson County Metro Government (hereinafter the

"Metrd Government"), and River City Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge No. 614 (hereinafter the

“Lodge"), by which said parties hereby agree upon the terms and conditions as hereinafter set out,

concerning wages, hours and working conditions of certain Members of the Louisville Metro Police
Department.

 

ARTICLE | — RECOGNITION

Section 1. Metro Government, pursuant to the Ordinance No. 135 Series 2003 and KRS
67C.107, recognizes the Lodge as the exclusive representative for all non-civilian Members of the
Louisville Metro Police Department for the purpose of collective bargaining on all matters within
the legitimate scope of representation.

Section 2. The Lodge recognizes the Mayor’s representative and designee as the sole
representative of Metro Government for the purposes of collective bargaining.

Section 3. All Members acknowledge that Metro Government shall consider the
positions and the proposals of the Lodge as the bargaining positions and proposals of all Members,
individually and collectively, in said unit.

Section 4. For the purposes of this Collective Bargaining Agreement (hereinafter
“Agreement”), the Lodge represents non-probationary sworn employees in the grades of police
officer and sergeant. As used in this Agreement, unless the context requires otherwise, the term
"Members" means non-probationary sworn employees of the Louisville Metro Police Department in
the grades of police officer and sergeant.

Section 5. Every police officer shall serve a probationary period of one (1) year from
sworn date. During the probationary period, police officers shall be entitled to only the economic
benefits contained in this Agreement. If training requirements are not timely completed within the
probationary period, the probationary period may be extended twice in ninety (90) day increments
for a total of an additional six (6) month period upon request by the Chief and approval by the Merit
Board. The Chief shall notify the employee and the Secretary/Examiner in writing stating whether
or not the employee is recommended for appointment at least ten (10) days prior to each extension.

ARTICLE 2 - SCOPE

This Agreement, pursuant to the Collective Bargaining Ordinance, codified in the Louisville
Metro Code of Ordinances, LMCO Section 35.050-35.058 and KRS 67C.107, extends to all matters
relating to wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment. This Agreement shall not extend
to matters of inherent managerial policy, including, but not limited to, the specific rights set forth in
Article 4 herein.
ARTICLE 3 — SUBORDINATION

This Agreement shall, in all respects wherever the same may be applicable herein, be subject
and subordinate to all applicable Metro Government ordinances and resolutions, statutes,
constitutional provisions and any revisions, amendments or newly adopted provisions to any
ordinance, statute or constitutional provision which is in effect upon the effective date of this
Agreement or which may be hereafter enacted. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the
Chief of Police from promulgating and adopting reasonable rules and regulations not contradictory
to the express provisions of this Agreement. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the
Louisville Metro Police Merit Board from adopting rules relating to qualifications, including
classification, examination, appointment, probation, promotion, demotion, transfer, layoff,
reinstatement, suspension, fine, removal and other disciplinary action not inconsistent with the
provisions of KRS 67C.301 to KRS 67C.327. With respect to any issue addressed by this
Agreement, the parties agree that they shall not seek amendment or promulgation of any Merit
Board Rule without the prior consent of the parties.

ARTICLE 4 - METRO GOVERNMENT RIGHTS

Section 1. The Lodge recognizes the prerogative of Metro Government to operate and
manage its affairs in all respects in accordance with its responsibilities, and that the powers of
authority which have not been officially abridged, delegated or modified by this Agreement are
retained by Metro Government. Specifically, all rights formerly or presently employed by or vested
in Metro Government on the effective date of this Agreement not officially abridged, delegated or
modified by this Agreement are retained specifically by Metro Government.

Section 2. The exclusive rights of Metro Government include, but are not limited to, the
right to:

a. determine the mission of its constituent departments, divisions, commission, and boards;
subject to applicable state law and merit board rules and regulations;

b. set standards of service;

c. determine the procedures and standards of selection for employment, assignment, transfer,
and promotions; subject to applicable state law and rules and regulations of the Merit Board;

d. direct its Members;

e. take disciplinary action subject to KRS 67C.301 to KRS 67C.327 and the rules and
regulations established by the Louisville Metro Police Merit Board;

f. relieve its Members from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons;
g. maintain the efficiency of governmental operations;

h. determine the methods, means and personnel by which operations are to be conducted;
i. determine the content of job classifications;
j. take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies or otherwise; and

k. exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and the technology of
performing its work subject to the conditions of this Agreement.

Section 3. This Agreement is not intended to restrict consultation with the Lodge
regarding matters within the right of Metro Government to determine.

Section 4. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as delegating to others the
authority conferred by law on Metro Government, or in any way abridging or reducing such
authority.

ARTICLE 5 — NONDISCRIMINATION

Section 1. Metro Government will not interfere with or discriminate in respect to any
term or condition of employment against any Member because of Membership in or legitimate
activity as required in this Agreement on behalf of the Members of the Lodge.

Section 2. The provisions of this Agreement shall apply equally to and be exercised by
all Members, without discrimination, as prohibited by laws covering employment discrimination on
account of disability, age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed, national origin, religion, sexual
orientation or political affiliation.

Section 3. The Lodge recognizes its responsibilities as representative to represent all
Members in the unit without discrimination, interference, restraint or coercion.

ARTICLE 6 - MUTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND PROHIBITION OF
STRIKES

Section 1. Metro Government acknowledges the Lodge as the recognized organization
representing sworn Members of LMPD as set forth in Article 1, and therefore, shall bargain
promptly upon request by the Lodge and continue for a reasonable period of time in order to
exchange freely information, opinions and proposals and to endeavor to reach agreement on matters
within the scope of representation.

Section 2. The Lodge recognizes Metro Government Mayor as the designated
representative of Metro Government and shall bargain promptly upon request by the Mayor and
continue for a reasonable period of time in order to exchange freely information, opinions and
proposals and to endeavor to reach agreement on matters within the scope of representation.

Section 3. The Lodge shall neither cause nor counsel any Member to engage in,
encourage, sanction or support any work stoppage, mass absenteeism, slowdown, mass resignation,
strike or any other type of concerted activity. In the event any Members violate this Article, Metro
Government shall immediately notify the Lodge. The Lodge shall immediately notify the Members
in writing to cease and desist from such activity and will exercise all reasonable action necessary to
cause said Members to return immediately to their normal duties. Members who engage in such
activity shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including discharge. In the event the Lodge
complies with its obligations herein, the Lodge shall not be liable to Metro Government for damage
caused by the strike. It is understood that this section does not limit Metro Government from any
other remedies provided by law.

ARTICLE 7 - LODGE SECURITY

Section 1. Membership in the Lodge is not compulsory. Members have the right to join
or not join and neither party shall exert pressure or discriminate against a Member regarding such
matters. All Members in the bargaining unit, however, shall be required to pay their fair share of the
cost of representation by the Lodge, as provided by Collective Bargaining Ordinance LMCO
Chapter 35.050-35.058.

Section 2. Lodge Membership dues and fair share dues shall be deducted monthly in an
amount certified by the Lodge. Members wishing to revoke their Lodge Membership must notify
Metro Government and the Lodge expressly and individually, in writing by certified mail, within
twenty (20) days following the effective date of this Agreement that such dues are not to be
deducted. The fair share fee may be deducted from Members’ wages and remitted to the Lodge,
with or without written authorization by the Member. The date for the commencement of the fair
share deduction shall be determined by the Lodge with appropriate advance notice given to Metro
Government and affected Members.

Section 3. Lodge Membership dues and fair share fees shall be transmitted to the
Treasurer of the Lodge by the fifteenth (15th) day of the succeeding month after such deductions
are made. The Lodge shall annually certify, in writing, the current and proper amount of its
Membership dues or fair share fees at least thirty (30) days prior to the initial deduction. The Lodge
shall notify Metro Government of the cost of representation by the Lodge and the date for the
commencement of the fair share deduction at least thirty (30) days prior to the initial deduction.

Section 4. Metro Government agrees to deduct from the wages of any Member, any
such sums of money as requested by said Member, as long as it is a continual or regular deduction,
on a form authorized by Metro Government and the Lodge. Such authorization shall be allowed in
any amount certified by the Lodge or requested by the Member.

Section 5. Members who are included in the collective bargaining unit but decline
Membership in the Lodge shall contribute to the financial support of the Lodge by payment of a fair
share fee, which shall be automatically deducted from the wages of the individual Member.

Section 6. The Lodge shall hold Metro Government harmless against any claims, legal
or otherwise, which may arise from these dues or fair share deduction provisions.
ARTICLE 8 - LODGE BUSINESS

Section 1. The Lodge may select not more than ten (10) persons and the Lodge
President to represent the Lodge in the negotiation of collective bargaining agreements during
working hours without loss in compensation. The persons so designated shall be allowed a
reasonable time off without loss of compensation to prepare proposals, collect data, meet with
counsel and/or committee Members and consultants for the purposes of expediting good faith
negotiations. The Lodge shall provide prior notice to the Chief of Police of the dates and times
needed to conduct business relating to negotiations between Metro Government and the Lodge;
provided, however, if the Lodge desires to conduct business more than one hundred eighty (180)
days prior to the expiration date of this Agreement, the Lodge will provide fourteen (14) days
written notice to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be notified by the Lodge in writing of
any substitutions or replacements of designated persons.

Section 2. A maximum of three (3) representatives from the Lodge, representing the
Lodge, shall be granted leaves with pay for the purposes of meeting with other Metro Government
Members or Metro Government officials in order to process grievances filed by Members covered
by this Agreement and/or in order to assist in presenting any cases covered by this Agreement in
arbitration proceedings. Pay to said representatives shall be on a straight-time basis only. The
names of the three (3) representatives from the Lodge and the amount of time spent on such
activities shall be reported in writing within ten (10) days to the Chief of Police. It is further
provided that not more than one (1) such Member from the same Unit performing the same duties,
on the same shift, shall be so named.

Section 3. The Lodge may select no more than six (6) representatives who shall be
allowed to attend extraordinary as well as regular sessions of the Kentucky General Assembly.
Three (3) of the Lodge representatives shall be allowed to so serve without loss in compensation.
The remaining Lodge representatives shall use their accumulated days, annual leave or holidays for
such purposes. The Lodge will submit in writing the names of its representatives to the Chief of
Police not later than fourteen (14) days before the time when the expected leave will be taken. The
Lodge shall provide written notification to the Chief of Police of any Lodge representative
substitution/replacement.

Section 4. A Member elected and serving as President of the Lodge, shall beginning

July 1, 2013, received his full salary and all benefits to which he is normally entitled as a sworn

Member of the Police Department working a straight forty (40) hour week, and he shall be relieved

of all obligation to work as a sworn Member of LMPD, and he shall be free to conduct the affairs of

the Lodge without being subject to the authority of the management of LMPD except as provided

herein. The President’s work schedule will consist of five (5), eight (8) hour days per week, except

as described in Section 4 (B-3) and Section 4 (B-9) of this article. A Member elected and serving as

President of the Lodge, shall be entitled to all of his salary and fringe benefits from the Metro
Government while conducting union business provided:

A. If the President of the Lodge is employed by Louisville Metro Government then on July

1, 2013, and on each successive July 1, Metro’s obligation to provide annual

leave/holidays under Article 30 — Paid and Unpaid Leaves, of this Agreement, shall be

reduced by three (3) hours of accrued annual leave/holiday time during the first full pay
period that occurs each July, to compensate Metro Government for the salary and
benefits of the President of the Lodge. In all remaining pay periods throughout the fiscal
year (July 1 through June 30), Members will accrue annual leave/holidays as indicated in
Article 30 — Paid and Unpaid Leaves.

B. The President of the Lodge, if a sworn Member of LMPD, shall adhere to the following:

1.

ll.

12.

Meet minimum training requirements, as established by LMPD for all
Members of the same rank as the President of the Lodge. Attend and
satisfactorily complete required training as directed by LMPD. Maintain the
same certification as all other LMPD officers.

Responds to emergency calls.

Be assigned policing duties during declared emergencies as determined by the
Chief of Police.

Work assigned details, if required by LMPD, during work weeks when off days
and vacation leave are restricted for the majority of Members.

Use and maintain LMPD equipment properly.

Maintain a uniform as outlined in LMPD Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs).

Attend court pursuant to a validly issued subpoena.

Carry LMPD identification, a LMPD badge and a departmentally approved
weapon as outlined in LMPD SOPs.

Take action in case of criminal violations.

. Adhere to the standards of conduct as set forth by this Agreement and LMPD

SOPs. Sustained violations of SOPs will be grounds for discipline for the
President of the Lodge, consistent with similar sustained violations of other
LMPD Members.

Shall be subject to Article 17 — Disciplinary Procedure and Bill of Rights of
this Agreement, and will provide a statement to the Professional Standards Unit
if required by LMPD.

Will provide the LMPD Chief's Office his/her work schedule one (1) week in
advance. The parties acknowledge and agree that LMPD cannot control or
dictate the details of the performance of the President of his duties as an officer
of the Lodge beyond what has been agreed to herein. It is to the mutual benefit
of the parties to have the President available to the LMPD for the proper and
effective performance of the contract. Lodge business performed by the
President of the Lodge beyond the forty (40) hours per week agreed to in this
agreement is not to be considered work for the benefit of or suffered or
permitted by LMPD. When LMPD directs the President to work over forty
(40) hours per week, under Section 4 (B-3) and 4 (B-4) of this Article, overtime
shall be paid by Metro.

The President of the Lodge shall be permitted to authorize leave for any Member(s) of the
Board of Directors to attend conventions, seminars, meetings, and to handle grievance processing
and other business of the Lodge. The total amount of leave authorized by the President shall not
exceed twenty (20) calendar days with pay. Any days not utilized in one (1) fiscal year will be
carried over to the next fiscal year. In addition, the President of the Lodge shall be allowed to
designate eligible Members to use accumulated days or days carried over. The Chief of Police may
authorize leave without loss of compensation in his sole discretion for any Member of the Board of
Directors to attend conventions, seminars, meeting, or to handle grievances or other business of the
Lodge. The Chief of Police may authorize leaves in excess of that referenced in this section.
Above-referenced leaves must be pre-approved by the Members’ immediate commander unless the
Member is a Member of the Executive Board. Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Section 5. The Chief shall authorize leave with pay for at least twenty (20) duly elected
delegates to attend the Kentucky State-Lodge Board and annual meetings and for fifteen (15) duly
elected delegates to attend the biennial National Conference. The Chief may in his sole discretion
authorize leave with or without pay for other Lodge business and functions.

Section 6. Elected Members of the Lodge shall be allowed to attend regular and special
board and general Membership meetings during regular work hours without loss in compensation.

Section 7. The two (2) police officers elected pursuant to KRS 67C.305 (3) who serve
as Members of the Louisville Metro Police Merit Board shall be allowed to attend regular and
special Merit Board meetings during regular work hours without loss of compensation.

Section 8. Three (3) Lodge Members, selected by the Lodge and subject to the approval
of the Chief of Police, with the option of additional names being required, shall be granted leave
with pay for a period of time not exceeding three (3) calendar days, necessary to attend and
represent the Lodge and the Division of Police at wakes and funeral services within 500 road miles
of Metro Louisville for the deceased peace Members killed in the line of duty. They shall wear
their full dress uniforms at such services. If the location thereof is within 500 road miles from
Metro Louisville, Metro Government shall provide an official Louisville Metro Police vehicle for
their transportation. If the location thereof is more than 500 road miles from Metro Louisville, the
Chief of Police shall have sole power to decide whether Metro Government will be represented. In
all instances of representation of the Lodge and Metro Government at such affairs, the Chief of
Police shall appoint one (1) of the representatives as the person in charge. This provision shall not
apply during Derby week and in case of emergency where, in the judgment of the Chief, manpower
cannot be spared. Pay for time spent under this provision shall not exceed the Member’s regularly
scheduled daily work hours.

Section 9. Metro Government agrees to provide the Lodge designated space on
available bulletin boards upon which the Lodge may post notice of meetings, announcements, or
information of interest to its Members. The Lodge further agrees that it will not post any material
which would be derogatory to any individual, Metro Government, Louisville Metro Police, County,
State, or which constitutes campaign material for or against any person, organization, or faction
thereof. Campaign material does not include announcements or information regarding internal
campaign elections of the Lodge. Furthermore, the use of the bulletin boards will not be to
advocate any legislative position, i.e., either ordinances before the Metro or legislation before the
state legislature. All notices of the Lodge will consist of items in good grammar and taste and shall
be signed by the President of the Lodge and/or Secretary of the Lodge and shall be on Lodge
letterhead. Copies of any material so posted shall be furnished to the Chief of Police or his
designee. Metro Government may remove any material, which Metro Government determines to be
in violation of this agreement, and the Lodge will be so informed. In addition, Metro Government
agrees the Lodge may use electronic mail for exactly the same purpose and in exactly the same
manner it uses bulletin boards. The electronic mail must be authored by the President, Vice
President, Secretary or Treasurer and copies of any material so electronically mailed shall likewise
be furnished to the Chief of Police. Lodge business shall be permitted during working hours unless
it disrupts the operations of the Department as determined by the Chief.

Section 10. The existing lease for Lodge parking facilities, in substantially the form
attached hereto as Appendix 3, will be renewed; however, the parties agree that in the event Metro
Government decides to cancel this lease the Lodge will be given ninety (90) days' written advance
notice of such cancellation. In the event that Metro Government cancels such lease, Metro
Government will provide an equal amount of spaces in Riverfront Garage if available. Since no
guarantee of space in Riverfront Garage can be made, the parties agree to negotiate concerning
securing equivalent parking space.

Section 11. The parties agree that they will each pay one-half (2) cost of the printing of
this Agreement.

ARTICLE 9 — SENIORITY

Section 1. The seniority of a Member shall commence on the first date of employment
as a Louisville Metro Police recruit or officer. Any Member hired prior to the effective date of this
Agreement shall maintain his or her seniority as of the effective date of this Agreement. Any
Member hired after the effective date of this Agreement may be given credit for prior employment
with another law enforcement agency, including LMPD, the former Jefferson County Police
Department, and the Louisville Division of Police for all employment for a maximum of five years
for purpose of salaries and annual leave accrual. In order to receive credit for prior employment
with another law enforcement agency for the purpose of this Article an individual must meet the
minimum requirements for hire as a lateral entry police officer as set by the Police Merit Board, and
have at least twelve months of law enforcement service as a full time sworn police officer in the
United States, and have completed the Kentucky Law Enforcement Council's (KLEC) approved
required basic training course, or an approved equivalent from another state's academy. No credit
shall be given for prior service with another law enforcement agency for purposes of promotions.
Any Member hired who was previously employed as a police cadet shall not receive seniority credit
for time served as a police cadet. Any Member hired with prior employment with Metro
Government in any other Department or agency shall be given credit for previous Metro
Government employment for purposes of vacation accrual only unless otherwise specified herein.

Section 2. Seniority shall be considered continuous unless the Member is:

(a) Discharged for cause after all appeals have been exhausted.

(b) Laid off for more than two (2) years.

(c) Fails to return to work within thirty (30) days without just cause after recall subsequent
to a lay-off.

(d) Voluntarily resigns: except if a Member returns to work within one (1) year after
voluntary resignation and works one (1) full year thereafter, his or her seniority shall be
deemed continuous, less such time as he or she was not a Member of the Louisville
Metro Police.
(e) Retired and returns to work.

Section 3. Metro Government shall furnish the Lodge on a semi-annual basis a seniority
list based on hire date as a Louisville Metro Police recruit or officer.

ARTICLE 10 —- ASSIGNMENTS

Section 1. Patrol Platoon Assignment

A. Platoon assignments for the rank of Officer in all Divisions and the Traffic Unit will
be filled based upon Departmental seniority. In the event that two (2) or more Members have the
same departmental seniority, then the Member’s division/unit seniority shall be the deciding factor.
In the event the two (2) or more Members have the same departmental and division/unit seniority,
the conflict will be resolved by a coin toss in the presence of the affected Members or FOP
representative.

1. Sergeant platoon assignments will be based on the Member’s most recent promotional
date. In the case of “ties”, departmental seniority will be the determining factor. In the
event the date of promotion and departmental seniority for two (2) or more sergeants is
the same, the conflict will be resolved by a coin toss in the presence of the affected
Members or a FOP representative.

a. If a sergeant has been demoted and he attains the rank of sergeant again, his
seniority in grade shall commence on the date of his most recent promotion.

b. Ifa lieutenant is demoted to the rank of sergeant, he shall be covered under the
provision of this CBA upon the effective date of his demotion. Upon being
demoted his seniority in grade as a sergeant shall begin on the date that he was
initially promoted to the rank of sergeant.

B. Administratively, the seniority rule may have to be overruled to prevent an overload
of less experienced Members on a platoon, or for another legitimate managerial reason which must
be documented to the Chief and subsequently approved by him. If an incident requiring this
unusual action occurs it will be made right as soon as practical by transferring the affected
Member(s) back to the platoon he came from.

Cc. The procedure for making platoon assignments is:

i. Metro Government shall post vacancies in the Division or Traffic Unit affected for a
period of not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the assignment being filled.

ii. If more than one shift has a vacancy or will have a vacancy through reassignment of
eligible officers to the first applicable posted position(s), all vacancies will be posted at
one time.

iii. A Member may not bid on a vacancy for sixty (60) days following his physical transfer
into a Division or the Traffic Unit.

iv. A Division or Traffic Unit platoon assignment vacancy occurs upon the effective date of
a Member’s transfer, retirement, promotion, resignation, demotion or termination.

v. Nothing herein shall prevent the Department from temporarily reassigning the least
senior Member in a Division because of personnel shortages for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days pending the filling of an opening.
Section 2. Other Assignments

A. Positions other than those in the Patrol Division and Traffic Unit Platoons must be
posted for a minimum of fifteen (15) days and have a minimum of three (3) years of service from
sworn date to qualify for appointment. Provided, however, if no applicants are received for these
positions, LMPD will repost the position and applicants will be considered without minimum
service requirements at the discretion of the Chief.

B. Division level specialty assignment will fall under “Other Assignments” as outlined
in this section and shall include [but not be limited to] detectives, flex/impact officers, halo officers,
division traffic officers, DRO officers, SRO officers and any other unit that is assigned to a Patrol
Division.

Cc. Department wide Specialized Unit assignments: Honor Guard, Bomb Squad, Dive
Team, Hostage Negotiation Team, Dignitary Protection Team, SWAT, and SRT. The service
requirement may be waived for a non-probationary Member with demonstrable certification,
previous employment, or other qualifications.

D. Assignments under this Section will be made on the basis of interviews. The
interviews shall be conducted within thirty (30) days of the closing of a posting. The same
interviewers will interview each candidate except in instances of sickness, disability, or excused
absence of an interviewer. The same questions will be asked of each candidate. Follow-up
questions may be asked by interviewers, if necessary. Interviewers will conduct the interviews and
then rank the candidates in order of preference. Interviewers shall consider the candidate’s
performance, seniority, service and collateral assignments, specialized qualifications, personal
needs of the Member, supervisory recommendations, the applicant’s attendance record, disciplinary
record, the most recent performance appraisal, and how well the applicant responded in the
interview. Ranked list of candidates will be valid for ninety (90) days. This ranked list in its
entirety shall be sent to each candidate before the vacancy/assignment is filled. The Unit
Commander shall select the person to fill the vacancy by choosing one of the top three candidates
on the ranked list, subject to the review of the Chief. The Chief may remove a candidate from the
list for just cause.

Section 3. Highly Sensitive Positions

The Chief reserves the right to appoint Members to the following highly sensitive positions
without posting the vacancy and not on the basis of seniority or interviews: Public Information
Officer, Public Integrity Unit, Professional Standards Unit, administrative assistants for the
Assistant Chiefs and Chief of Staff, and any other highly sensitive positions as designated by the
Chief. This will only be done in special circumstances

Section 4. Police Training Officers

A Member must have three (3) years from sworn date to qualify for appointment. Any
Member who meets this requirement, applies to be a PTO, and is not appointed to be a PTO shall be
afforded the opportunity to meet with the PTO coordinator and to be told with specificity why he
was not selected for the appointment.

Section 5. Other Transfers
A. Inter-Division voluntary transfers shall be made at the discretion of the Chief.
B. Intra-Division platoon transfers shall be subject to the provisions of Article 19.

10
ARTICLE 11 - PROMOTIONAL VACANCIES

Section 1. Promotional vacancy positions that are within the classified service regulated
by the Louisville Metro Police Merit Board shall be filled on a permanent basis within sixty (60)
days after the vacancy occurs. Such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with all Merit Board rules
and regulations.

Section 2. A vacancy shall be deemed to exist when a position in the classified service
is vacant due to demotion, death, resignation, retirement, promotion, termination or creation of a
new position. The Chief of Police shall notify the Lodge in writing within seven (7) days when a
vacancy as set forth herein occurs.

Section 3. Metro Government shall provide written notice to the Lodge that a position
will not be filled by promotion before a vacancy occurs.

Section 4. Metro Government and Lodge shall meet to discuss any proposed changes to
the promotional process including, but not limited to, examinations, selection process, etc.

Section 5. Any employee of the Department who assists or participates in the
development of the written examination and/or job simulation or grading or evaluating of
promotional applicants shall be prohibited from discussing or disseminating any and all questions
and/or answers with any promotional applicant. No employee of the Department will have access
to or participate in the development of the entire examination and/or entire job simulation.

Section 6. A Member may change a scheduled off day to sit for a written promotional
exam or participate in an assessment center with ten (10) days’ prior notice and approval of the
Member’s immediate supervisor. Such request shall not be arbitrarily denied without just cause.

ARTICLE 12 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 1. Any controversy between Metro Government and the Lodge concerning the
meaning and application of any provisions of this Agreement shall be adjusted in the manner set out
below. Both parties agree that disciplinary matters are not subject to the grievance procedure
contained in this Agreement. All disciplinary matters shall be appealed pursuant to state statute and
the rules and regulations of the Louisville Police Merit Board. The Lodge or any Member may file
a grievance and shall be afforded the full protection of this Agreement and the right to legal
counsel.

11
Section 2. A Member filing a grievance shall be allowed Lodge representation
consisting of one person on the Lodge committee and/or legal counsel at all grievance meetings.
The following rules for the presentation and solution of grievances or requests are prescribed:

Step 1. The grievance shall be brought to the attention of the Member's Division or Unit
Commander within fourteen (14) days from the time circumstances giving rise to the grievance
occur. The grievance shall be in writing, dated and signed by the Member. The written grievance
shall set forth the nature of the grievance, the facts on which it is based, the specific provisions of
the Agreement allegedly violated, and the relief requested. The Division or Unit Commander shall
discuss the grievance with the Member within ten (10) days after the date presented. If the
grievance is resolved as a result of such a meeting, the settlement shall be reduced to writing and
signed by the District or Unit commander and the Member. If no settlement is reached, the Division
or Unit Commander shall give a written answer to the Member and the Lodge within seven (7) days
following their meeting.

Step 2. If the Member is not satisfied with the answer obtained in Step 1, he may appeal the
grievance in writing to the Chief of Police; provided that the appeal is presented within seven (7)
days after receipt by the aggrieved of the Step 1 answer. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of
the appeal, the Chief of Police or his designee shall discuss the grievance with the aggrieved
Member and the Lodge and give the aggrieved Member his answer in writing within seven (7) days
after holding such meeting.

Step 3. If the aggrieved is not satisfied with the answer obtained in Step 2, he may appeal his
grievance to the Mayor within seven (7) days after the receipt of the aggrieved party or the Lodge of
the Step 2 answer. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the appeal, the Mayor or designee shall
discuss the grievance with the aggrieved, and shall answer it in writing within seven (7) days after
holding said meeting.

Step 4. If the aggrieved or the Lodge is not satisfied with the answer obtained in Step 3,
either may seek advisory arbitration within fourteen (14) days after the receipt by the aggrieved of
the Step 3 answer. The Lodge shall notify Metro Government of its intention to proceed to
arbitration by notice to the Louisville Labor Management Committee or the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service (FMCS) of the intent to proceed to advisory arbitration and a request for a
submission of a list of arbitrators. An arbitrator shall be selected by each party, the Lodge and
Metro Government, alternatively striking a name from the panel submitted by the Louisville Labor
Management Committee or the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS) with the Lodge
having the right to strike first. The parties shall meet for the purpose of striking names from the
panel within fourteen (14) days of receipt by both parties of the panel from which an arbitrator is to
be selected. The expenses, wages, and other compensation of any witness called before the
arbitrator, shall be borne by the party calling such witnesses. Other expenses incurred, such as
wages of participants preparation of briefs and data to be presented to the arbitrator, shall be borne
separately by the respective parties. Not withstanding the above, all on duty sworn LMPD
employee witnesses or participants shall receive their regular compensation from Metro
Government. Any Member who is required by the Department or Metro Government to appear
and/or testify at an arbitration proceeding at a time outside of the Member’s regularly scheduled
hours of work shall be paid a minimum of three (3) hours. If these hours are in excess of a regular
work day of eight (8) or ten (10) hours or a regular forty (40) hour work week, the Member shall be

12
paid at a rate one and one-half (1 %) times his regular rate of pay for these hours. The arbitrator's
fee and expenses and cost of any hearing room shall be borne equally by each party. The powers of
the arbitrator are limited as follows: the arbitrator shall have no jurisdictional right to alter, amend,
modify, disregard, add to or subtract from or change in any way any term or condition of this
Agreement or to render an award which is in conflict with any provision of this Agreement. The
arbitrator shall consider only the specific issue or issues submitted to him and shall confine his
decision to a determination of the facts and an interpretation and application of this Agreement.

Section 3. If a grievance is not presented within the time limits set forth in this Article,
the grievance shall be considered waived. If a grievance is not appealed to the next step within the
specified time limit or any extension thereof, it shall be considered settled on the basis of Metro
Government's last answer. If Metro Government does not answer a grievance or an appeal thereof
within the specified time limits, the Member or the Lodge may elect to treat the grievance as denied
at the step and immediately appeal the grievance to the next step. The time limit in each step may be
extended by mutual agreement of Metro Government and Lodge representative(s) involved in each
step.

Section 4. The grievance procedure contained in the Collective Bargaining Agreement
is the sole and exclusive means of resolving all grievances arising under this Collective Bargaining
Agreement.

ARTICLE 13 - STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE

Section 1. Metro Government has the right to promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations, including disciplining Members, not inconsistent with the express provisions of this
Agreement.

Section 2. No changes in the Standard Operating Procedures of the Louisville Metro
Police Department shall be effective until they have been posted on bulletin boards (including the
intranet) in all departments for a period of ten (10) calendar days. Any change shall be forwarded to
the Lodge ten (10) days prior to the effective date.

ARTICLE 14 - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT

Section 1. A Member shall not be required to take a polygraph examination as a
condition of continued employment.

Section 2. A Member shall be required to submit to a blood test or urinalysis under the
conditions set forth in Appendix 1, Drug Testing Policy and Procedures.

Section 3. Metro Government agrees not to use electronic surveillance equipment in the
investigation of any Member.

Section 4, No Member shall be required as a condition of continued employment to

carry any firefighting equipment or apparatus while on duty except for fire extinguishers or
technological replacements thereof, assigned to patrol vehicles. This section shall not be construed

13
to prohibit a Member from performing or assisting in the performance of customary and ordinary
firefighting duties or responsibilities in emergency situations.

Section 5. There will be no layoffs of Members for the duration of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 15 - HEALTH AND SAFETY

Section 1, The Department will take reasonable precautions to safeguard the health and
safety of the Members during their hours of work and maintain reasonable standards of safety and
sanitation, and the Lodge and all Members shall cooperate in all matters concerning the health and
safety of Members.

Section 2. No Member shall be scheduled for pre-planned event details or regular work
shifts without a minimum of ten (10) hours between details or regular work shifts unless the Chief
deems an emergency exists. Investigative units that utilize flexible work schedules are exempt from
having ten (10) hours between scheduled work shifts. Members shall be paid at the applicable
overtime rate for each hour or portion thereof that is worked in violation hereof. The overtime rate
for the applicable hours shall be applied to the first available straight time hours worked following
the violation.

Section 3. The Department will make available at each Division and/or the property
room on a twenty-four (24) hour basis the following equipment: personal protection equipment
(PPE) kit items; OC canisters; air tanks for refilling; pepper ball air cannisters; ECW cartridge
reloads; and necessary equipment and supplies for sanitizing Departmental equipment. A Member
shall be permitted to obtain said equipment with the permission of the Member’s commanding
officer.

Section 4. The Department shall inspect and replace, if necessary, gas masks and filters
on a periodic basis.

Section 5. Metro Government shall provide a Member with replacement body armor
and vest that meets or exceeds current National Institute of Justice (NIJ) body armor standards,
before of within ninety (90) days after expiration, at no cost.

Section 6. Metro Government shall issue all Members a Kevlar riot helmet with an
affixed face shield.

ARTICLE 16 - MILITARY LEAVES

Section 1. Members who are also Members of the National Guard or of any reserve
component of the Armed Forces of the United States, shall be entitled to a leave of absence from
their respective duties, without loss of time, pay, regular leave, or of any other rights or benefits to
which they are entitled, while in the performance of duty or training in the service of this state or of
the United States under competent orders as specified in this section. In any one (1) federal fiscal

14
year, Members, while on military leave, shall be paid their salary and fringe benefits for a period or
periods not exceeding twenty-one (21) calendar days. Any unused military leave in a federal fiscal
year shall be carried over to the next year. Any unused military leave shall expire two (2) years after
it has accrued.

Section 2. Should a Member or a probationary police officer be inducted or enlisted into
active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States, he or she shall be granted a leave of absence,
without pay, for the duration of his or her original term of service. He or she shall accrue seniority
the same as he or she would under continuous employment in the Louisville Metro Police
Department, provided, however, that upon his or her return to duty as a police officer, he or she
successfully completes his or her probationary period. A Member who is ordered to active duty
and serves a minimum of six (6) months in the Armed Forces of the United States shall upon return
be credited with eighty (80) hours of annual leave.

Section 3. A Member inducted or enlisted into active duty with the Armed Forces of the
United States, any Reserve Unit or the National Guard for a period in excess of thirty (30) days
shall be eligible for continuation of medical (dental, vision, or any other) insurance at the same level
as active Members at the same cost as active Members.

Section 4. A Member ordered to active duty shall receive pay and benefits as specified

below:

A. The Member shall retain all vacation time accrued prior to the beginning date of
Member’s issued order to active duty. No Member shall be forced to take, use, or burn
vacation, personal or other leave time while on active duty with the Armed Forces of the
United States.

B. Members on military leave that appear on active Louisville Metro Police Merit Board
promotional eligibility lists, shall be considered for promotional vacancies consistent
with Police Merit Board rules and Kentucky law.

ARTICLE 17 - DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE AND BILL OF RIGHTS

Section 1: Receipt of Complaints

A. Any complaint taken from any individual alleging misconduct or rule violations on the part of
any Member, shall be taken as follows:
i. If the complaint alleges criminal activity on behalf of a Member, the allegations may be
investigated without a signed, sworn complaint of the individual;

ii. If the complaint alleges abuse of official authority or a violation of rules and regulations of
the department, an affidavit, signed and sworn to by the complainant, shall be obtained;

iii. If a complaint is required to be obtained and the individual, upon request, refuses to make
allegations under oath in the form of an affidavit, signed and sworn to, the department may
investigate the allegations, but shall bring charges against the Member only if the
department can independently substantiate the allegations absent the sworn statement of the
complainant;

15
iv.

vi.

vii.

viii.

ix.

yA

Nothing in this section shall preclude the department from investigating and charging a
Member both criminally and administratively.
The complaint procedure as defined in KRS 15.520 and this Agreement shall be explained to
the complainant by a LMPD commanding officer or Professional Standards Unit (PSU)
investigator.
If the complainant elects to file a formal complaint, the complaint shall be taken in the form
of an affidavit, signed and sworn to by the complainant.
If the complainant declines to file a formal complaint, a complaint inquiry form shall be
completed. The commanding officer or the PSU investigator shall record as many specifics
as possible.
If the complainant declines to file a formal complaint under oath, the PSU shall do one of
the following:
a) Complete a complaint inquiry form and forward to the Chief’s Office if the
allegations involve criminal activity.
b) Complete a complaint inquiry form if there is information independent of that
obtained from the citizen substantiating the allegations of misconduct.
c) Handle the complaint in an informal manner. In these cases, no
investigative paperwork is entered into a Member’s personnel file.
The complaint inquiry form shall be maintained solely and exclusively by the PSU. The
contents of this information shall be transmitted to the Chief or his designee for appropriate
handling. If the Chief or his designee directs an investigation, the procedures outlined in
KRS 15.520 and this Agreement shall be followed. If no investigation is directed by the
Chief or his designee, the complaint inquiry form shall be destroyed ninety (90) days after
receipt.

Section 2: Manner of Investigation

. No Member shall be subjected to interrogation in a departmental matter involving alleged

misconduct on his or her part, until forty-eight (48) hours have expired from the time the request
for interrogation is made to the accused officer, in writing. The interrogation shall be conducted
while the officer is on duty. The police officer may be required to submit a written report of the
alleged incident if the request is made by the department no later than the subject officer’s next
tour of duty after the tour of duty during which the department initially was made aware of the
charges. A Member required to submit a written report shall be informed in writing of the
nature of the alleged misconduct or rule violations.

The forty-eight (48) hour written notice shall include a copy of the complaint. In the event a
written complaint does not exist, the forty-eight (48) hour notice shall include other written
information sufficient to advise the Member of the specific allegations of misconduct.
Questioning of Members shall be conducted only while the Member is on duty.

. All statements or interrogations of Members, complainants and other witnesses shall be

electronically recorded. Statements obtained from complainants, either sworn or otherwise,
shall be transcribed and sworn to. Non-recorded statements may be taken from a civilian
witness who refuses to give a recorded statement.

Upon request of the Member under investigation or his representative, the Member shall be
provided a copy of the transcript of the recorded interrogation, if one has been made, and a copy

16
of the recording. The Member shall provide the Professional Standards Unit (PSU) with an

audiotape, or technological equivalent at his expense.

. Metro Government shall provide the Member any written or recorded statements in the
possession of the department in connection with any disciplinary action taken against the
Member except for attorney work product. Likewise, the Member and the Lodge shall provide
Metro Government with statements or other information regarding any disciplinary action that
has been taken against a Member except for attorney work product. The written statement shall
be provided to the Member or Metro Government within ten (10) days after a written appeal is
filed with the Louisville Metro Police Merit Board.

. If discipline is imposed and the Member files a timely written appeal with the Louisville Metro
Police Merit Board, Metro Government shall make available to testify at the hearing all current
Members requested by the appealing Member or his counsel.

. The Professional Standards Unit (PSU) shall complete its investigation within a reasonable
period of time of the Chief’s directive or complaint.

All complaints and PSU directed investigations begun after the effective date of this Agreement
not involving criminal allegations shall be completed and forwarded to the Chief or his designee
for review and disposition within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the complaint, initiation
of the PSU investigation or a return of the case by the Chief or designee to PSU, whichever is
later in time. In the event that Metro Government needs additional time to complete an
investigation, prior to the expiration of the one hundred and eighty (180) days, Metro
Government shall provide a written explanation to the Member and FOP setting forth the
specific reasons for the need for additional time.
The PSU shall provide a status update of its investigation in a timely manner upon request of the
affected Member. This update will include an estimated completion date.

. No threats, promises, or coercions shall be used at any time against any police officer while he
or she is a suspect in a criminal or departmental matter. Suspension from duty with or without
pay, or reassignment to other than an officer’s regular duties during the period shall not be
deemed coercion. Prior to or within twenty-four (24) hours after suspending the officer
pending investigation or disposition of a complaint, the officer shall be advised in writing of the
reasons for the suspension.

. Ifa police officer is under arrest, or likely to be arrested, or a suspect in a criminal investigation,
he shall be afforded the same constitutional due process rights that are accorded to any civilian,
including, but not limited to, the right to remain silent and the right to counsel, and shall be
notified of those rights before any questioning commences. Nothing in this section shall prevent
the suspension with or without pay or reassignment of the police officer pending disposition of
the charges.

. When a police officer has been charged with a violation of departmental rules or regulations, no
public statements shall be made concerning the alleged violation by any person or persons of the
local unit of government or the police officer so charged, until final disposition of the charges.

- No police officer as a condition of continued employment by the local unit of government shall
be compelled to speak or testify or be questioned by any person or body of a nongovernmental
nature.

 

Section 3: Disposition of Investigation

17
. If a complaint is investigated by the PSU, the complaint and resulting investigation will be
forwarded to the Chief or his designee. The Chief upon receiving the investigative findings and
recommendations will review all complaints forwarded to his office and will handle the
complaint in one of the following ways:

i. Unfounded
ii. Exonerated
iii. | Closed by Exception
iv. Not Sustained
v. Sustained.

. On complaints where the Chief believes no misconduct has occurred, he will communicate in
writing to the complainant and the Member that his review of the facts does not indicate any
misconduct by the Member and will advise both parties of his intentions to dismiss the
complaint.

. If after reviewing the complaint investigation, the Chief concludes the Member is guilty of
misconduct or violations of the rules, regulations or procedures, the Chief may impose
disciplinary action from a verbal or written reprimand to suspension to demotion to dismissal by
providing in writing to the Member with particularity, the reasons therefore. The disciplinary
action taken should be determined by the seriousness of the misconduct and by the extent of the
wrongdoing or injury to the victim. It shall also be commensurate with the circumstances
surrounding the total incident and with the Member’s service record and prior sustained
complaints.

. No previous discipline against a Member may be considered by Metro Government or the Chief
as the basis for any subsequent discipline or an involuntary transfer except as follows:

i. A previous written reprimand may be considered for one (1) year following the issuance
of the reprimand.
ii. A previous suspension of seventy-two (72) hours or less, or an involuntary transfer may
be considered for three (3) years following the issuance of the suspension.
iii. A previous suspension of over seventy-two (72) hours may be considered for five (5)
years following the issuance of the suspension.

Section 4: File Retention

. All PSU files shall be maintained in accordance with applicable statutes and regulations

regarding archive retention.
. All PSU files will be maintained in accordance with Article 18, Personnel Files, of this

Agreement.

Section 5: Critical Force Incidents

. When a Member is involved in the use of deadly force or in any incident that results in life
threatening injuries or death, Metro Government shall notify the Lodge President or his
designee and designated Lodge counsel. The Lodge shall provide Metro Government with
appropriate telephone numbers for said notification.

. If a Member agrees to provide a statement to the Public Integrity Unit as a result of his use of
deadly force or his action and conduct in any incident that results in life threatening injuries or

18
death, the Member shall be informed of his right to counsel. The Member shall also be
informed when counsel is present and / or otherwise available for advice.

. Only the Member, Public Integrity Unit detective and / or his supervisor and Member’s counsel
shall be present during the Member’s interview. Members shall not be required to provide a
statement concerning the use of deadly force during a criminal investigation with Professional
Standards Unit detectives present.

. Metro Government may require a Member involved in a use of deadly force incident resulting in
an injury to take a drug and alcohol test pursuant to the procedures as established in Appendix 1,
Drug Testing Policies and Procedures.

. A Member interviewed by the Public Integrity Unit shall be provided a copy of the transcript of
the recorded interview and copies of their audio and video recordings.

Section 6: Hearings and Administrative Due Process Rights

. When a hearing is to be conducted by any appointing authority, legislative body, or other body
as designated by the Kentucky Revised Statutes, the following administrative due process rights
shall be recognized and these shall be the minimum rights afforded any police officer charged:

i. The accused police officer shall have been given at least seventy-two (72) hours’ notice
of any hearing;

ii. Copies of any sworn statements or affidavits to be considered by the hearing authority
and any exculpatory statements or affidavits shall be furnished to the police officer no
less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the time on any hearing;

iii. If any hearing is based upon a complaint of an individual, the individual shall be notified
to appear at the time and place of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested;

iv. If the return receipt has been returned unsigned, or the individual does not appear, except
where due to circumstances beyond his control he cannot appear, at the time and place of
the hearing, any charge made by the individual shall not be considered by the hearing
authority and shall be dismissed with prejudice;

v. The accused police officer shall have the right and opportunity to obtain and have
counsel present, and to be represented by the counsel;

vi. | The appointing authority, legislative body, or other body as designated by the Kentucky
Revised Statutes shall subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
production by them of books, papers, records, and other documentary evidence at the
request of the accused police officer or the charging party. If any person fails or refuses
to appear under the subpoena, or to testify, or to attend, or produce the books, papers,
records, or other documentary evidence lawfully required, the appointing authority,
legislative body, or other body as designated by the Kentucky Revised Statutes may
report to the Circuit Court or any judge thereof the failure or refusal, and apply for a
tule. The Circuit Court, or any judge thereof, may on the application compel obedience
by proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of a
subpoena issued from the court;

vii. The accused police officer shall be allowed to have presented, witnesses and any
documentary evidence the police officer wishes to provide to the hearing authority, and
may cross-examine all witnesses called by the charging party;

viii. Any police officer suspended with our without pay who is not given a hearing as
provided by this section within sixty (60) days of any charge being filed, the charge then

19
ix.

shall be dismissed with prejudice and not be considered by any hearing authority and the
officer shall be reinstated with full back pay and benefits; and

The failure to provide any of the rights or to follow the provisions of this section may be
raised by the officer with the hearing authority. The hearing authority shall not exclude
proffered evidence based on failure to follow the requirements of this section but shall
consider whether, because of the failure, the proffered evidence lacks weight or
credibility and whether the officer has been materially prejudiced.

ARTICLE 18 - PERSONNEL FILES

Section 1. Personnel records are the repositories of official information regarding an
active, terminated or retired Member of Metro Government.

Section 2. Custody and Review

A.

The Secretary Examiner of the Louisville Metro Police Merit Board shall be the

official records custodian and shall be responsible for maintaining and securing all personnel files.

i.

iii.

B.

Unless otherwise provided for, the content of a Member's personnel file shall be held in
the strictest confidence.

i. Personnel files shall be available for administrative review by the Louisville Metro

Police Merit Board and paid Members of their staff.

Information from a Member's personnel file shall be released to any other persons or
agencies when Metro Government is ordered to do so by a lawful subpoena or order of a
court or an administrative agency, or pursuant to an Open Records Request, or when
permission to do so is received in writing from the Member. In the event a subpoena or
Open Records Request is served on Metro Government, Metro Government shall
immediately notify the Member and the Lodge. At the request of the Member, Metro
Government shall wait three (3) days from receipt of an Open Record Request to comply
with it. In no event shall Metro Government be required to wait beyond the legal
requirement as contained in the Open Records law. Metro Government shall have no
liability to any Member hereunder and the Member shall have no rights against Metro
Government for compliance with this provision.

iv. Metro Government shall be responsible for developing and following retention

schedules which comply with appropriate laws and regulations for all records and
personnel files. The following information contained in a Member's personnel file shall
be considered matters of public record and may be released or verified without express
permission of the Member:

(a) Member’s name
(b) Member’s dates of employment
(c) Class or position held by Member
The duties of the Health and Safety Officer shall be maintained. | The Human

Resources Unit with the Louisville Metro Police Department shall maintain the official medical
records file for each Member. A Member's medical records file becomes a part of the Member's
official personnel medical file when Metro Government has received medical information
concerning an application for workers’ compensation, disability retirement, normal retirement, long-
term disability claim or termination of employment.

20
Cc. The Chief s office may maintain an operating file on each Member within the

Department.

D. In addition, supervisors may maintain a file on each Member under their direct
supervision.

E. Members or their authorized (in writing) representatives may review their personnel
records upon request.

F. To preserve confidentiality and protect the privacy of Members, access to a

Member's personnel records shall be restricted to the following:
i. Secretary/Examiner of the Merit Board.

ii. Member who is the subject of the file or authorized representative.
iii. Member's supervisor.

iv. Chief or Chief s designee.

y. Director of Metro Government Human Resources or designee.

vi. Metro Government Mayor or designee.
vii. County Attorney or designee.

G. Whenever a document is placed in or taken out of a personnel file, the person
performing such act shall indicate so by executing a "sign-in and sign-out list" which shall have the
name of the person, date and the time that the personnel record was either placed in the file or taken
out.

Section 3. Contents
A. The contents of a Member's official Louisville Metro Police Merit Board personnel

file shall include:

i. Applications for employment or promotion that results in appointment or
promotion.

ii. Employment history, including personnel action documents affecting
appointment, promotion, transfer, salary change, etc.

iii. Copy of commendations.

iv. Member emergency information.

v. Payroll withholding documents.

vi. Insurance and retirement records.

vii. Education and training records.

viii. | Performance evaluations.

ix. Leave records.

x. Copy of reprimands and disciplinary actions.

B. The contents of a Member's medical file shall be limited to:
i. Metro Government medical examination records.
ii. Records obtained or received from any physician in reference to a Member's

medical fitness.

iii. Any medical waiver or release signed by the Member.

iv. Request by Metro Government or its designee for any additional or special
examinations, the record of the actions taken and the results of the additional
or special medical examination.

Cc. Member files held by the Chief’s Office shall contain documents necessary for
program operations limited to:

i. Member home address and telephone number including pager number if any.

21
Present job information (i.e. description, location, etc.)

iii. Member emergency information.

iv. Payroll data and supporting documentation.

v. Copies of leave records.

vi. Copy of performance evaluations including supporting documentation.

ii. Copies of commendations and awards including supporting documentation.
viii. | Copies of reprimands and disciplinary actions.

ix. Performance observation forms.

x. Copies of at-fault accident reports and supervisor documentation.

xi. Copies of training requests, approvals and certifications of completion
including training transcripts.

 

  

Section 4. Supervisor Files

A. Supervisors may maintain one file for each Member under their supervision which
contains informal notes by the supervisor concerning the Member's job performance or conduct,
notes made in performance review or other counseling sessions with the Member, copies of
completed work assignments, drafts or work in progress and informal written communications
between the Member and the supervisor concerning performance or conduct issues.

B. The purpose of supervisory files is to encourage supervisors to maintain informal
records on a continuing basis, which will provide substantiation for performance ratings or other
performance or conduct related actions. File materials become part of a Member's personnel file
only if they are incorporated in or attached to related personnel actions. In the event a Member
transfers within the department, his supervisory file materials may be transferred to a new
supervisor.

Cc. Documents contained in supervisory files shall not be retained after one (1) year
from said documentation.

ARTICLE 19 - TRANSFER RIGHTS

Section 1. Transfer of a Member is the movement from one position or task assignment
to another position or task assignment within the Department. The following may be reasons for
transferring a Member:

i. A voluntary request;

ii. A lack of funding resulting from loss of federal/state funds;

iii. An administrative reorganization;

iv. An emergency;

v. A change in a Member's physical or mental condition as determined by a competent
medical authority;

vi. The resolution of a grievance, disciplinary action or other problem affecting the

operational efficiency of a unit or organization;
vii. | The need for additional personnel at a division or unit;
viii. The best interests of the Department.

Section 2. For any involuntary Member transfers pursuant to Section 1, Subsection ii,

Members shall be transferred based on unit seniority with junior officers in the unit being
transferred first.

22
Section 3. A Member shall be notified by the Chief of the intended involuntary transfer
or duty assignment by ten (10) days written notice setting forth with specificity the reason for said
transfer, unless the Chief, in his sole discretion, declares an emergency or a Member agrees to
waive the ten (10) days’ notice. The written notification of transfer shall set forth the specific
factual basis which constitutes the reason for the transfer. A Member who suffers a severe hardship
as a result of the transfer may, however, request an extension of up to twenty-eight (28) days upon.
showing of specific cause.

Section 4. A Member may appeal an involuntary transfer in accordance with Article12.

ARTICLE 20 — RESIDENCY

No presently employed Member shall be required to live in Metro Louisville during the
length of this contract.

ARTICLE 21 - MAINTENANCE OF STANDARDS

Conditions of employment relating to wages, hours and working conditions shall be
maintained as set forth in the Agreement unless a modification of said Agreement is negotiated
between the parties.

ARTICLE 22 - VEHICLE INSURANCE

Section 1. During any period when a Member is assigned a vehicle and upon proof that
the Member has purchased non-owner vehicle insurance for that vehicle, Metro Government shall
reimburse the Member the lesser of the cost of the insurance or $150.00.

Section 2. So long as Metro Government provides the option to a Member, who is
assigned a vehicle, owned or leased by Metro Government, and authorized for personal use, of
entering into a Personal Use Liability Agreement, which provides liability protection for up to
$100,000.00 per accident while on personal use, then Metro Government is not obligated to
reimburse the officer the cost of non-owner vehicle insurance under this Article.

ARTICLE 23 - LEGAL PROTECTION

Section 1. Metro Government shall provide for the defense of a Member in any action in
tort arising out of an act or omission occurring within the scope of his employment. A Member
shall be represented by the Jefferson County Attorney’s Office or represented by private counsel
with the prior written approval of the Jefferson County Attorney’s Office when a claim is made
against him as an individual for money damages, for personal injury, or property damages resulting
from the good faith performance of his official duties, whether suit may or may not be pending on
the claim at that time, even if the claim arises from acts performed by the Member prior to the

23
effective date of this Agreement, and even if the claim is not presented until the Member has left the
position currently held.

Section 2. If a settlement of a claim is made or a judgment is rendered against a Member
and that Member was either represented by the Jefferson County Attorney’s Office or represented
by private counsel with the prior written approval of the Jefferson County Attorney’s Office, that
settlement or judgment shall be paid by Metro Government in accordance with the procedures,
discretion, and determination vested in the Jefferson County Attorney’s Office. Provided, however,
Metro Government's responsibility under this Agreement to indemnify a Member shall not include
any duty to pay punitive damages.

Section 3. In consideration of the good faith performance by Members of their official
duties this grant of indemnity shall constitute an inviolable contract within the Metro Government,
and the accrued benefit provided shall not be subject to reduction or impairment by alteration,
amendment, or repeal.

Section 4. Upon receiving service of a summons and complaint in any action in tort
brought against him or a notice of a claim to be made, a Member shall, within ten (10) days of
receipt, give written notice of such action to the Chief or his designee.

Section 5. Metro Government may refuse to pay a judgment or settlement in any action
against a Member, or if Metro Government pays any claim or judgment against any Member
pursuant to Section 2 of this Article, it may recover from such Member the amount of such payment
and the costs to defend if:

i. the Member acted or failed to act because of fraud, malice, or corruption; or

ii. the action was outside the actual or apparent scope of his employment; or

iii. the Member willfully failed or refused to assist the defense of the cause of action,
including the failure to give notice to Metro Government pursuant to Section 4 of this
Article; or

iv. the Member compromised or settled the claim without the approval of Metro
Government; or

v. the Member obtained private counsel without the consent of the Jefferson County
Attorney's office, in which case, Metro Government may also refuse to pay any legal
fees incurred by the Member.

Section 6. No provision of Article shall in any way be construed to abrogate the defense
of governmental immunity.

ARTICLE 24 - SALARY SCHEDULE

Section 1. The base hourly rate for Members effective upon approval of this Agreement
shall be as indicated on the salary schedule attached through June 30, 2018. Members shall be
placed on the pay grade of the salary schedule based upon the Member’s seniority date.

Section 2. Effective upon approval of this Agreement, the salary schedule shall be the
salary schedule in effect on June 30, 2010. Effective July 1, 2012 and ending on June 30, 2013, the

24
base hourly rates shall be increased by one (1%) percent retroactive to July 1, 2012. Effective for the
fiscal year beginning on July 1, 2013 and ending on June 30, 2014, and for each subsequent fiscal
year under this Agreement, ending on June 30, 2018, the base hourly pay rates for Members shall be
increased by two (2%) percent each year.

ARTICLE 25 — PENSION

Section 1. Metro Government shall enroll and begin required contributions to the
County Employees Retirement System, Hazardous Duty Plan when an employee becomes a sworn
Member of the Department or as required by applicable law, whichever first occurs.

Section 2. Metro Government agrees to participate and contribute in the Federal Social
Security Program in accordance with the law, recognizing that some former Members of the City of
Louisville Police Department are not currently included in the federal Social Security program.

ARTICLE 26 - COURT PAY

Section 1. In the event that an active Member or a retired Louisville Metro Police
Officer (or a retiree from the former Louisville Division of Police or the Jefferson County Police
Department) is required to appear to testify in Court outside of his regularly scheduled work hours
or after retirement, he shall be paid fifty dollars ($50.00) until July 1, 2013, when the amount will
be increased to sixty dollars ($60.00), regardless of the number of appearances or the number of
courts he may attend on any given day. If a Member appears in different courts on the same day
and the starting time of the courts is four (4) hours or greater apart, and each of the court
appearances are outside the Member's regularly scheduled work hours, the Member will receive
credit for two (2) appearances for that day. The parties to this Agreement acknowledge that the
above rate shall be the agreed-upon rate for court appearances pursuant to applicable wage and hour
laws.

Section 2 If an active Member’s court appearance for which he was paid Court Pay as
provided above is in excess of two (2) hours, the Member shall be paid for the time in excess of two
(2) hours at one and one-half times (1 2) his regular rate of pay.

ARTICLE 27 —- OVERTIME

Section 1.

A. A workday shall consist of eight (8) hours except Members assigned to units utilizing a 4/10
schedule, in which case a workday shall consist of ten (10) hours. A regular workweek shall
be forty (40) hours in any calendar week. Members shall be paid overtime at the rate of one
and one-half (1 4) times their regular rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of a regular
work day of eight (8) or ten (10) hours or a regular forty-hour work week. There will be no
pyramiding of overtime; a Member will be paid for the same hours only once.

25
B. In instances where a Member is recalled to work outside scheduled shift hours, the Member
will receive overtime pay for all hours worked during the recall, regardless of whether or not
the Member worked forty (40) hours during the workweek. A minimum of one (1) hour of
overtime shall be paid even if the call out is cancelled.

C. In instances where a Member works overtime under a federal or state grant funding source
or federal or state agreement funding source, specifically designated for overtime for police
patrol, investigations or other police enforcement or police protection duties, the Member
will receive overtime pay for all hours worked over forty (40) hours during that workweek.
For this paragraph, annual leave/holidays and sick leave shall be computed as days worked
for overtime purposes.

D. In instances where a Member works overtime paid from forfeited federal funds or forfeited
state funds, specifically designated for overtime for police patrol, investigations or other
police enforcement or police protection duties, the Member will receive overtime pay for all
hours worked over forty (40) hours during that workweek. For this paragraph, annual
leave/holidays and sick leave shall be computed as days worked for overtime purposes.

Section 2. Members are scheduled in advance to work a forty (40) hour schedule. Unit
commanders will submit a monthly off day schedule through their division commander to the Chief
of Police. The Department will modify schedules as far in advance as possible to accommodate
special events, provided however, no advance notice is necessary to inform the Members that the
monthly off day schedule shall not be in place during the Kentucky Derby Festival, Kentucky Oaks
and Kentucky Derby events. The Department will only modify schedules within a scheduled
workweek in order to respond to disasters, emergencies declared by the Chief, or to achieve specific
law enforcement objectives. Supervisors will not change schedules during a scheduled workweek
solely to avoid paying overtime. Nothing herein shall preclude the Department from granting a
Member’s request for a schedule change.

If LMPD changes a Member’s off day or off day sets, to staff scheduled or unscheduled
details, not including regular patrol duties (such as schedule changes to accommodate other platoon
Members’ transfers or retirements, etc.) more than four (4) times in a calendar year, not including
anticipated off day or off day set changes for Derby Festival Events, Ironman, and Breeders Cup,
LMPD will pay overtime worked on the Member’s affected regularly scheduled off day or off day
set, on the fifth (5") and subsequent off day or off day set, if any. This paragraph only applies to
the First (1°), Second (2") and Third (3) platoons in the patrol divisions.

Section 3. The Department shall not change a Member’s scheduled off day(s) unless
seven (7) days’ notice is given. Provided, however, this seven (7) days’ notice shall not have to be
given if the Chief, in his sole discretion, declares an emergency or a Member agrees to waive the
notice.

Section 4. Overtime earned shall be reported and paid in fifteen (15) minute increments.
Members working seven (7) minutes or less of overtime shall receive no payment. Members
working eight (8) or more minutes of overtime shall receive payment for fifteen (15) minutes of
overtime.

26
Section 5. No regularly scheduled off days consecutive with approved leave shall be
changed unless the Chief, in his sole discretion, declares an emergency or a Member agrees to
waive the notice. The intent of this section is to prevent a Member from being unexpectedly
recalled from vacation because of an off day change.

ARTICLE 28 - SPECIAL DUTY PAY

When a Member is assigned by the Chief or his designated representative and works in an
acting capacity in a position having a higher classification than his regular position, the Member
shall be paid at the rate established for the higher classification for every hour or major portion
thereof that the Member serves in such capacity. A Member shall have the option to refuse working
in an acting capacity. No Member shall be required to work in an acting capacity in a vacant
position in a higher classification for a period longer than sixty (60) days.

ARTICLE 29 - SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT PAY

Section 1. Any Member, including a Police Training Officer, shall receive the following
special assignment pay for each full day (or majority thereof) the Member accompanies a
probationary officer:

A. Special assignment pay equal to one (1) hour of overtime pay if assigned to an eight
(8) hour shift.

B. Special assignment pay equal to one and one-quarter (1.25) hour of overtime pay if
assigned to a ten (10) hour shift.

Section 2. A Field Training Sergeant shall receive special assignment pay equal to one
(1) hour of overtime pay for each calendar week.

Section 3. Canine Officers and any other Members acting as dog handlers shall receive
special assignment pay equal to 45 minutes of paid time each calendar day for time spent during
non-working hours caring for and maintaining their animals. Canine officers shall not receive
special assignment pay for calendar days their animals are placed in a kennel.

Section 4. Members shall receive fifty ($.50) cents per hour shift differential where their
regularly scheduled shift begins between 2200 and 0200 hours.

ARTICLE 30 - PAID AND UNPAID LEAVES

Section 1. Annual Leave/Holidays.
A. Effective upon ratification of this Agreement by the Metro Council, full-time
Members are eligible to receive annual leave/holidays with pay as provided in the schedule set forth
below:

27
Years of Service Bi-weekly Leave Earned

1 through 4 years 6.24 hours
5 through 9 years 8.08 hours
10 through 14 years 9.00 hours
15 through 19 years 9.93 hours
20 through 24 years 10.85 hours
25 through 29 years 11.78 hours
30 years and over 12.71 hours

B. The annual leave/holidays listed above shall be paid leave days with the
provision that eight (8) annual leave/holidays may be redeemed as pay on December | of each
calendar year. The paid days taken in lieu of the annual leave/holidays shall be at the Member’s
regular rate of pay. A redeemed annual leave/holiday pay shall be paid by direct deposit.

Cc. From November 1 to November 30 of each year, a Member may submit one
(1) primary annual leave/holiday request of a maximum of eighty (80) consecutive hours for the
following calendar year and any contiguous consecutive days following that year to his immediate
supervisor. Requests shall be submitted on the Agency Web system or departmentally approved
equivalent. The primary requests will be grouped by rank and granted based on seniority. Primary
annual leave/holiday requests shall be granted or denied on or before December 15 of each year.
Years of service shall be computed by using seniority as set forth in Article 9. Approved leave of
any duration of forty (40) hours or more cannot be canceled unless an emergency is declared by the
Chief. Approved leave, of thirty-nine (39) hours or less cannot be canceled without approval of the
Chief or designee.

A Member may submit other annual leave/holiday requests at any time during the calendar
year. A Member may also submit other annual leave/holiday requests for the following calendar
year after December 15 of the current calendar year. The Member’s immediate supervisor shall
grant/deny said leave request within a reasonable time not to exceed ten (10) days. A supervisor
shall not deny said request if adequate personnel are scheduled at the time the leave request is made.

D. Annual leave/holiday accrual is cumulative to the extent set forth herein.
Accrued annual leave/holidays cannot exceed 480 hours and any leave in excess of this amount
must be taken by December 31* of any calendar year. Upon separation of employment other than
through retirement, a Member shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for accrued annual
leave/holidays not to exceed 320 hours. Upon retirement, a Member shall be entitled to receive
reimbursement for accrued annual leave/holidays not to exceed 400 hours, with no employer or
employee pension contributions. However, if the Member has at least 64 hours of accrued annual
leave/holidays, then 64 hours of the aforementioned 400 hours shall be paid by separate check as
holiday pay, which pay shall be subject to employer and employee pension contributions. Payment
for annual and holiday leave shall be based on the Member’s regular rate of pay.

Section 2. Personal Days.

In addition to the annual and holiday leave allowed above, there shall be, each year, thirty-
two (32) personal hours of leave time granted which must be taken as time off in the year granted,
and shall not accumulate beyond the year when granted. The paid hours taken as personal hours

28
shall be at the regular rate of pay of the Member. Approved time off of personal hours cannot be
cancelled unless an emergency is declared by the Chief.

Section 3. Bereavement Leave.

In the event a death occurs in a Member's immediate family, the Member shall be granted up
to three (3) workdays of leave with pay. The immediate family consists of a Member's spouse,
children, step-children, parents, parents-in-law, step-parents, grandparents, grandparents-in-law,
brothers, step-brothers, sisters, step-sisters, grandchildren, legal guardian (present and former),
aunts, uncles and any Member of a Member's household.

Section 4. Other Leaves

Leave of absence may be granted to maintain continuity of service in instances where
unusual and unavoidable circumstances require a Member's absence. Leaves are granted on the
assumption that the Member will be available to return to regular employment when the conditions
necessitating the leave permit.

The duration of each leave of absence will depend upon each circumstance and the
recommendation and approval of the Chief of Police. The leave of absence is considered a privilege.
Granting of leaves of absence will be administered with utmost discretion, taking into account the
Member's service record and the circumstances necessitating the request. Intended period of
absence from work must be indicated.

When the need to be absent is known, the Member will be expected to advise the Chief of
Police in writing at the earliest possible time. Absence without reason may result in disciplinary
action. The giving of false reasons for an absence shall result in disciplinary action. Leaves of
absence will not interrupt service time. The Member shall be returned to the same, or equal
employment, unless circumstances of the agency have so changed as to make it impossible or
unreasonable to do so. Leave of absence shall be without pay and benefit accrual unless otherwise
directed by the Chief. All applicable paid time off must be exhausted prior to the leave becoming
unpaid. Members returning from a leave of absence may be required to undergo a fitness for duty
evaluation process and if returned to duty will be assigned based on the needs of the department.

ARTICLE 31 - SICK LEAVE

Section 1.

A. Members shall request paid sick leave of the Chief of Police or his duly
authorized representative. The Chief or his duly authorized representative shall not unreasonably or
arbitrarily deny paid sick leave. Sick leave with pay shall be granted to Members when they are
unable to perform their duty because of sickness or injury.

B. There shall be no limit on the amount of paid sick leave the Chief may
authorize, however, Members on extended paid sick leave are required to report on their status in
writing to the Chief of Police every thirty (30) days, including a medical certification of their
diagnosis and prognosis, and the medical necessity for the continued use of sick leave.

Cc. A Member who is absent from work for three (3) or more consecutive work
days or where the Unit/Division Commander has reasonable suspicion to believe an abuse of sick
leave may be occurring, may be required to provide a medical statement from his treating physician.

D. Proof of abuse of paid sick leave privileges may constitute grounds for
disciplinary action including dismissal.

29
Section 2. It is the intent of this Article to provide sick leave for eligible Members;
however, it is understood that during the time when a Member uses sick leave in excess of a
calendar working month, he shall not accrue nor be compensated for holidays or other monetary
allowances; and it is further understood that during the time when a Member uses sick leave in
excess of six (6) weeks, he shal] not accrue or be compensated for annual leave.

Section 3. A Member who is unable to report for duty because of illness, injury,
prescribed medication or treatment shall immediately notify his/her commanding officer or other
competent authority as designated by the Unit Commander upon determining the need to be absent
from duty. This notification should be made at least one (1) hour prior to the scheduled reporting
time.

Section 4. Light Duty

A. It is the responsibility of a Member to advise the Office of the Chief of Police
through the appropriate chain of command of an inability to perform all job functions required of
active duty status. Notice of the Member’s inability to perform all job functions required of active
duty status must be made in writing, clearly stating the reason the Member is not able to physically,
mentally, or emotionally perform the duties required of active duty status. The Chief of Police
retains the sole discretion to approve or deny requests for “light duty” status. Metro Government
may require Members on sick leave to work in a light duty capacity, subject to a review and/or
medical examination by competent medical authority of Metro Government’s choosing and at
Metro Government’s cost. Metro Government may require Members that were injured in the line of
duty to work in a light duty capacity, following a review and/or medical examination by competent
medical authority of Metro Government’s choosing and at Metro Government’s cost. In the event a
Member’s physician disagrees with Metro’s physician regarding the Member’s ability to work light
duty, the Member may grieve the finding of Metro’s physician directly to Step 2 of the grievance
process outlined in Article 12 — Grievance Procedure. During this grievance, the Member may
submit a detailed opinion from a third physician of the Member’s choosing and at their expense.
The Chief will consult with Metro’s physician before rendering a decision. The Member may not
be required to work light duty following a decision by the Chief while the Member progresses
through the remaining grievance steps, however, in the event the Member decides not to appeal to
the next step, or the arbitrator determines the Member was able to work light duty, the Member will
be charged vacation hours for sick leave or injury leave used following Step 2 of the Grievance
Procedure.

B. “Light duty” status permits a Member who is unable to perform all job functions,
but is not so disabled as to warrant sick leave, to return to work at less-than-full duty while
recovering. For purposes of this directive, conditions justifying assignment to “light duty” status
include, but are not limited to, any disability rendering it medically unsafe for a Member to perform
full job functions and for a sworn Member to perform full police functions.

Cc. Members on “light duty” status shall report in writing to the Chief of Police every
thirty (30) days of their status, including a medical certification of their diagnosis and prognosis.
When a Member’s physician certifies in writing that the Member is able to perform all job functions
and return to active duty status, the Member shall notify the Office of the Chief of Police in writing,
including all pertinent medical certification. Upon review of the Member’s request, the Chief of

30
Police shall notify the Member whether (1) the request to return to active duty is authorized or (2)
more information is required prior to an authorization for return to active duty.

Section 5. Sick leave with pay may be granted at the discretion of the Chief to a
Member in case of illness or disability in the Member's immediate family reasonably requiring the
presence of the Member. The immediate family of the Member for the purpose of this section shall
include parents, spouse and children.

Section 6. Maternity And Paternity Leave
A. Members shall be granted six (6) weeks of paid maternity leave. Members requiring
additional leave for medical reasons must submit a physician’s statement to the Division/Unit
Commander including the medical necessity for additional use of sick leave.

B. Members shall be granted up to seven (7) days of paid paternity leave. Members requiring
additional leave for family medical reasons shall refer to Section 5 above.

B. Members adopting a child shall be granted up to seven (7) days of paid adoption leave at the
Chief's discretion. If both parents are Members of the Department, each Member may have up to
seven (7) days at the Chief’s discretion.

ARTICLE 32 - IN-LINE-OF-DUTY INJURIES AND DEATH
IN-LINE-OF-DUTY

Section 1. The Metro Government agrees to pay medical and hospital expenses required
for the treatment and rehabilitation of in-line-of-duty injuries and disabilities resulting from an in-
line of-duty injury sustained by Members; provided, however, that such payment is to be made only
in excess of, or if not otherwise paid by, all applicable hospital, medical and worker's compensation
insurance, or other remunerative process.

Section 2. The term in-line-of-duty injuries shall be construed to mean those injuries
sustained by Members when in actual performance of their duties during normal duty hours. It shall
also include those injuries sustained not during normal duty hours; provided, however, that the
Member was acting within his scope of employment when such injury occurred.

Section 3. In the event a Member should receive service disability injuries rendering
him temporarily unable to perform his duties, he shall continue to receive his salary at his regular
rate of pay for a period not to exceed one year; provided, however, that the Member endorse and
turn over to the Metro Government any worker's compensation income benefits due or received. In
the event that the Member's injuries or disability is not temporary, the Member shall, at the earliest
time, apply for disability retirement, early retirement or normal retirement. Metro Government
reserves the right to require the Member to provide evidence to support the need for the Member’s
inability to return to work as a result of the in-line-of-duty injury, such as a medical statement from
the Member’s treating physician establishing either an expected return to work date or a firm
follow-up visit with the physician, and/or to require examination of the Member by a reputable
physician of Metro Government’s choosing at Metro Government’s cost.

31
Section 4. In the event that a Member dies as a result of service connected cause, the
Metro Government shall pay to the beneficiary designated by the Member or in the event there is no
designated beneficiary, then to the Member’s estate, in addition to applicable pension benefits, and
in supplement to any Worker's Compensation income benefits and Social Security benefits which
may be due, in lump sum, an amount equal to twelve (12) months of the Member's rate of pay on
the salary schedule attached to this Agreement.

Section 5. It is understood that the intention of Section 4 is to compensate dependents in
the event of death of a Member casually related to his service as a police officer as distinguished
from the normal hazards to which general Members of the public are exposed. The presumptions
contained in KRS 79.080 are incorporated herein.

Section 6. In the event that any supplementary payment is made under this Article, and
subsequent Worker's Compensation income benefits are paid to the Member or his widow or
dependents for the period for which payment under this Article has been made, the Member or his
widow or dependents shall refund to the Metro Government an amount equal to any Worker's
Compensation income benefit received for a period for which the salary of the Member has been
paid by the Metro Government under this Article. However, it is understood between the parties
hereto that the obligation to refund Worker's Compensation income benefits shall apply only to
those benefits that accrued for the periods during which Metro Government has paid the Member’s
salary. Repayment shall not be required from any award received representing monies paid for
residual or permanent injury, be it total or partial, for any period for which the salary of the Member
has not been paid by the Metro Government.

ARTICLE 33 - HEALTH INSURANCE

Section 1. Health Insurance Plan Effective July 1, 2013

A. In addition to health insurance plans available to all Metro Government employees
(hereafter “non-FOP plans”) that are also available to Members, Metro Government
shall offer Members the option to enroll in a hospital and medical coverage health
insurance plan only available to Members (hereafter “FOP-only plan”). The benefits
of the FOP-only plan shall be the same as the benefits and coverage offered to FOP
Members in Health Plan Year 2013 (July 1, 2012 — June 30, 2013).

B. Effective July 1, 2013, the Member shall pay the following for monthly premiums:
Type of Coverage FOP-only plan Non-FOP Plan
Employee only $40 $40
Employee + Child(ren) $60 $40
Employee + Spouse $60 $40
Employee + Qualified Adult $60 $40
Employee + Spouse + Child(ren) $100 $50
Employee + Qualified Adult & Child(ren) $100 $50

32
Section 2. Health Insurance Plan for Members Hired After July 1, 2013

The health insurance benefit plans available to all Metro Government employees (the
“Metro Plans”) are the benefit plans, and only benefit plans available to FOP Members hired on or
after July 1, 2013. Members hired on or after July 1, 2013 will pay the same premiums available to
all other Metro Government employees.

Section 3. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA)

In order to comply with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) and
applicable IRS regulations, Louisville Metro Government reserves the right to align its plan designs
and rates to remain compliant with mandated healthcare reform, PPACA and IRS regulations.

ARTICLE 34 - CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCES

Section 1. Members shall receive an annual clothing allowance of $1,500 payable in
quarterly payments by separate check, beginning July 1 of each fiscal year. Provided, however, that
such allowance shall not begin until six months after distribution of the initial issue of clothing and
further, that after such six months the allowance shall be prorated for the first quarter depending on
the time when the six month period ends. Newly hired officers shall receive an initial distribution
of uniforms.

Section 2. Members shall receive an annual equipment allowance of $900 payable in
quarterly payments by separate check, beginning July 1 of each fiscal year. Provided, however, that
such equipment allowance shall not begin until six months after distribution of the initial issue of
equipment and further, that after such six months the allowance shall be prorated for the first quarter
depending on the time when the six month period ends. Newly hired officers shall receive an initial
distribution of equipment, excluding a service weapon and leather gear.

Section 3. If a Member has been assigned to a non-uniform function for three (3) years
or longer requiring the exclusive wearing of civilian clothing (rather than a uniform) and thereafter
is transferred to a uniform function, Metro Government will pay such Member upon transfer
$750.00 for uniform replacement as needed.

Section 4. Metro Government will furnish a Member covered by this Agreement with
new articles of clothing or equipment to supply or replace any portion of the official uniform or
equipment that are added or changed in design.

Section 5. A Member who resigns or retires from service after successful completion
of the one (1) year probationary period shall be permitted to retain the uniform clothing as the
Member’s own property, but shall be required to return to Metro Government the official equipment
issued to the Member by Metro Government.

Section 6, Effective July 1, 2009, Members shall be provided an increase of the
allowances set forth in this Article of a total of sixty ($60.00) dollars per month payable bi-weekly.

33
ARTICLE 35 - LIFE INSURANCE

The Metro Government will provide all Members with a group life insurance plan that
contains the following provisions:
A. $15,000.00 payment upon death of the insured, or that amount of insurance provided to
other Metro Government employees, whichever is greater; and
B. $15,000.00 accidental death and dismemberment insurance, or that amount of insurance
provided to other Metro Government employees, whichever is greater.

ARTICLE 36 - TUITION BENEFITS

Members are eligible to participate in the Metro Government Tuition Reimbursement
Program as afforded to all employees of Metro Government.

ARTICLE 37 - PERSONAL PROPERTY REIMBURSEMENT

Section 1. Officers desiring to be reimbursed by the Metro Government for personal
property lost or damaged while on duty or responding to an official police action may submit to the
Chief in writing such request, indicating the circumstances and particulars (including date, time and
place) of the incident giving rise to such claim, a description of the property lost or damaged, proof
of purchases and acquisitions, date of purchase or acquisition, value when purchased or acquired,
and value claimed at time of loss or damage.

No such request shall be submitted unless and until all other avenues of reimbursement have
been exhausted, including criminal court orders, restitution and insurance. All such requests shall
carry the officer's certification that no other reimbursement or indemnity for the same property has
been claimed, received, or is applicable, and that any reimbursements made by the Metro
Government shall be prepaid if reimbursement, restitution, insurance or other indemnity is received
at any time by the officer for the loss claimed.

Upon receipt of any such request, the Chief shall approve or disapprove the request.

Section 2. Personal property covered in paragraph 1 shall not exceed four hundred

dollars ($400.00) for any one incident, but weapons and uniforms are not included in the maximum
reimbursement.

34
ARTICLE 38 - GENDER

Any and all reference in this Agreement to the masculine gender shall be deemed to refer to
either female and/or masculine gender as the case may be.

ARTICLE 39 - ENTIRE AGREEMENT

Section 1. Metro Government and the Lodge shall not be bound by any requirement,
which is not specifically stated in this Agreement. Specifically, but not exclusively Metro
Government and the Lodge are not bound by any past practices or understandings of Metro
Government or the Lodge, or their predecessors. The parties agree that only those items contained
in this Agreement constitute the entire agreement and respective rights of the parties.

Section 2. The Lodge and Metro Government agree that this Agreement is intended to
cover all matters referred to in Article 2 and that during the term of this Agreement, neither Metro
Government nor Lodge will be required to negotiate on any further matters affecting these or other
subjects not specifically set forth in this Agreement.

Section 3. Should any provision of this Agreement be found to be inoperative, void or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in
full force and effect for the duration of this Agreement.

Section 4. It is expressly understood that no provision of this Agreement shall be
waived or considered waived by any act, omission or communication; provided, however, that both
parties shall have the right to mutually agree to waive a provision by express written authorization
from Metro Government representative and the representatives of the Lodge.

ARTICLE 40 — TERM

Section 1. This Agreement shall become effective upon approval by the parties and shall
remain in effect up to and including June 30, 2018 and shall be presented to the Metro Council
pursuant to LMCO Section 35.057.

Section 2. Should either party desire to alter any portion of any terms hereof that party
shall notify the other party in writing not less than one hundred and fifty (150) days prior to June
30, 2018.

Section 3. Metro Government intends to continue the special employment benefit
provisions (fringe benefits) of this Agreement upon expiration of this Agreement during the
pendency of good faith negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement. The Metro
Government agrees that such benefits shall not be arbitrarily terminated.

Section 4. | Metro Government agrees to provide the Lodge written commitment to begin
negotiations for a successor agreement as soon as possible prior to February 1, 2018.

35
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have affixed their signatures this 3 rhoy

of Yow 4 » 2013.

 

Date: __“t %

|

    

 

PRESIDENT

Date: G/ ‘26/) 3

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

MICHAEL O’CONNELL
JEFFERSON COUNTY ATTORNEY

\ C

STEPHEN S. LAZARUS
HARDIN, LAZARUS & LEWIS, LLC
COUNSEL, FOP LODGE # 614

 

36
APPENDIX 1 - DRUG TESTING POLICY AND PROCEDURES

Policy Statement

The policy of the Louisville Metro Police Department (hereinafter “Department”) is to
maintain a drug-free work environment and workforce.

The River City Fraternal Order of Police, Lodge # 614 (hereinafter the “Lodge”) and the
Department agree that there are compelling interests which demand that the Louisville Metro Police
Department’s Members be drug-free. Public confidence in its law enforcement agency is directly
related to the integrity of the agency’s Members, and the public has a right to expect that those they
employ to protect them are both physically and mentally prepared to assume their duties at all times,
free from the serious impairments which result from the use of controlled substances and other
forms of drug abuse.

Definitions

1. Drug Test - The production and submission of urine by a Member, in accordance
with Departmental procedures, for chemical analysis to detect prohibited drug usage.

2. Reasonable Suspicion - A reasonable suspicion is an articulable belief that a
Member is using or is under the influence of illegal drugs, drawn from specific and particularized
facts and reasonable inference from those facts. Reasonable suspicion that a Member uses or is
using illegal drugs may be based upon, but not limited to:

a. Observable phenomena such as direct observation of drug use, possession of drugs,
or the physical symptoms of being under the influence of a drug;

b. A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior, including abnormal leave
patterns;

c. Arrest or conviction for a drug-related offense or the identification of a Member as
the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug possession, use or as the focus
of a criminal investigation into illegal drug possession, use or trafficking;

d. Facts or circumstances that develop in the course of an authorized investigation of an
accident or unsafe work practice;

e. Information provided by reliable and credible sources or information independently
corroborated;

f. Newly discovered evidence that the Member has tampered with a previous drug test.

3. Individual Suspicion - Reasonable suspicion that a Member is illegally using a
prohibited substance.

37
4,

Medical Review Member (MRO) - Licensed physician with knowledge of

substance abuse disorders whose role is to review and interpret test results obtained through drug
testing under this policy.

duty:

Procedures and Rules
Prohibited Activity - The following rules apply to all Members, while on or off
No Member shall use or possess any controlled substance as defined in Chapter

218A of the Kentucky Revised Statutes in any manner violative of any federal or
state law or departmental rule.

. No Member shall ingest any controlled substances as defined in Chapter 218A of the

Kentucky Revised Statutes unless as prescribed by a licensed medical practitioner
and in compliance with departmental rules concerning same.

Any Member who unintentionally ingests, or is made to ingest, a controlled
substance shall immediately report the incident to his supervisor, or if off duty to an
on duty supervisor, so that appropriate medical steps may be taken to insure the
Member’s health and safety. Any Member who refuses an order to submit to a drug
test pursuant to this procedure is subject to dismissal.

. All departmentally owned property, including but not limited to vehicles, lockers,

desks, file cabinets, and computer hardware and software are subject to inspection at
any time. Members are prohibited from placing or keeping any contraband or
unauthorized equipment or items in said departmentally owned facilities. Sealed
containers or personal items such as purses or briefcases found therein are subject to
search if there is reasonable suspicion that they contain contraband.

Random Testing
Every Member will be required as a condition of continued employment to submit to
unannounced random drug tests during the course of the Member’s employment.

. Testing under this provision shall be conducted on a random basis, and this

procedure will not be used in order to effectuate a test on any particular individual
Member.

The Department will attempt to conduct approximately the same number of
unannounced tests each month, but will not be bound by any numerical formula.

. All personnel assigned to the Narcotics/Vice Unit shall comprise a separate pool for

the purpose of selection for random testing. There will be no limit to the frequency
of selection from this pool.

38
3. Drug Testing on Basis of Transfer

All Members shall be required to submit to a drug test as a condition of transfer to the Air
Patrol, the Special Investigations Unit or the Narcotics/Vice Unit. Additionally, all applicants for
ancillary units such as SWAT Team, Hostage Negotiations Team and Bomb Squad are required to
take a drug test as a requirement for consideration as a Member.

4. Drug Testing on the Basis of Individualized Reasonable Suspicion
a. Members will be required to take drug tests as a condition of continued employment
in order to ascertain prohibited drug usage whenever reasonable suspicion exists as
to that Member’s use of prohibited drugs.

b. Ifreasonable suspicion is established that a Member is in violation of this policy, the
Member shall be relieved of duty and his police authority suspended. The Member
shall not engage in any law enforcement activities. The suspension shall remain in
effect until a final determination of policy compliance has been made.

c. The person of any Member is subject to a reasonable search only upon consent or
reasonable suspicion that they are in possession of any controlled substance or other
contraband in violation of this policy.

d. The Chief of Police, Bureau Chiefs and the majors shall have the authority to direct
any Member to submit to a drug test based on the reasonable suspicion standard.

Notification for Testing

1. Testing based upon reasonable suspicion shall be done as soon as possible without
any prior notification to the Member.

2. Members notified of their selection for random testing shall proceed immediately to
the collection site. Members who are on leave, vacation, or already absent at the time of their
selection will be excused but remain subject to future random testing. Upon notification, Members
shall be afforded the opportunity to change into civilian clothing. The change of clothing must be
immediately available, and the clothing change must occur at the Member’s Division or Unit.

Drug Testing Procedures

1. Location - The test shall be given at an authorized, private collection facility as
designated acceptable by the Chief of Police. The location shall be secure and afford reasonable
privacy to the Member.

2. Specimen Collection
a. Before testing, the Member will be requested to produce a departmental
identification card for positive identification. Each Member will be informed that
they may request a split sample and the procedures for same.

39
Before submitting to urinalysis, a Member shall be asked and shall be under a duty to
provide a list of any and all prescription or over-the-counter medications taken by a
Member within thirty (30) days of the sample. This information shall be retained and
forwarded to every testing facility being utilized.

In a logbook the collection site personnel will enter the date, the Member’s
identification number, and the time that the specimen is being collected in the
appropriate spaces. The collection site personnel will then sign their name next to
these entries and the Member will initial, The logbook will be maintained at the
testing facility in a secure file cabinet and will be subject to the confidentiality
provisions of this policy. The specimen collected from the Member shall be
identified only by the Member’s identification number throughout the testing
process. The testing laboratory will not have access to the Member’s name.

The Member shall be requested to remove any unnecessary outer garments (e.g.,
coat, jacket) that might conceal items or substances that could be used to tamper or
adulterate the urine sample. All personal belongings (e.g. purse, briefcase) shall
remain with the outer garments. The collection site personnel requesting the
specimen shall note any unusual behavior or activity by the Member. The Member
may be required to a pat down search.

The Member will be escorted to the collection area and instructed to wash and dry
his hands prior to urination. After washing hands, the Member shall remain in the
presence of the collection site personnel collecting the specimen and shall not have
access to water fountains, faucets, soap-dispensers or cleaning agents.

At the collection site, toilet bluing agent shall be placed in the toilet tank whenever
possible, so the water in the toilet bowl always remains blue.

. The Member will be kept under observation throughout the testing process to ensure
the integrity of the test. However, collection site personnel will not be in direct
observation of the act of urination (except as provided in subsection “h” below). The
Member will be allowed to provide a specimen in the privacy of a stall or otherwise
partitioned area that allows for privacy.

. Direct observation of the collection of the specimen will be allowed only when there
are reasonable grounds to believe that the Member will attempt to adulterate the
sample. Reasonable grounds will exist when there is evidence that the Member has
tampered with the specimen obtained in a previous test, or the Member is discovered
to have or be in possession of items or substances that could be used to adulterate the
sample.

Collection site personnel shall always attempt to have the container or specimen
bottle in sight before and after the Member has urinated. Containers shall be tightly
capped, properly sealed, and properly labeled and initialed by the Member and
collection site personnel. A chain of custody form sufficient to maintain the

40
specimen’s integrity and acceptable to testing labs shall be utilized for maintaining
control and accountability from the point of collection to the final disposition of the
specimen. Appropriate chain of custody requirements will be maintained and every
effort will be made to minimize the number of persons handling the specimen.

Upon receiving the specimen from the Member, the collection site personnel will
determine if it contains at least sixty (60) milliliters of liquid and is within normal
body-temperature range.

. Ifa Member is unable to produce an adequate sample, the Member must be provided
a reasonable amount of time to do so. The Member may be given a reasonable
amount of liquid (e.g., glass of water) if the Member is unable to produce a
specimen. The Member will remain under observation until able to provide a
specimen.

Specimens found to be outside of the normal body temperature range will be rejected
and the Member will be asked to provide another sample. The second specimen will
be collected under direct supervision. Both specimens will be submitted for
urinalysis. Occurrences of this nature will be fully documented by the collection site
personnel collecting the specimen.

. All samples confirmed positive shall be retained and placed in properly secured
long-term storage for at least 365 days or longer if requested by the Member or the
Department.

Testing Methodology

A testing laboratory, duly accredited by the United States Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS), shall perform the urinalysis of a Member who is required to
submit to a drug test. A testing laboratory, duly accredited by HHS, shall also
perform the urinalysis and the split-sample if requested by the Member. Only
trained, qualified and certified lab technicians shall perform all urinalyses. The
specimens will be kept secure and the chain of custody noted on the form submitted
with the specimen.

. The initial test to be utilized for the drug screen shall be an immunoassay test, unless
the sample is being tested for the presence of anabolic androgenic agents, in which
case the initial test utilized shall be Gas Chromatography with Mass Spectrometer
(GC/MS). All specimens identified as positive on the initial test shall be confirmed
by the GC/MS test. The initial cutoff levels to be used when screening specimens to
determine whether they are negative are:

44
Initial Test Level (ng/ml)!

Marijuana metabolites
Cocaine metabolites
Opiate metabolites
Phencyclclidine
Amphetamines
Anabolic Androgenic Agents
Testosterone
All other anabolic
Androgenic agents

AARYWNS

50
300
20007
25
1,000

6:1 ratio?

Any detectable amount

All specimens identified as positive on the initial test shall be confirmed using
GC/MS techniques at the cutoff values listed in this paragraph for each drug. All

confirmations shall be quantitative analysis.

Concentrations that exceed the linear region of the standard curve shall be
documented in the laboratory record as “greater than highest standard curve value.”

Confirmato)

Marijuana metabolites"

2. Cocaine metabolites®

3. Opiate metabolites
Morphine
Codeine

4. Phencyclelidine

5. Amphetamines
Amphetamine

Methamphetamine
6. Anabolic Androgenic Agents

Testosterone

All others

Test Level (ng/ml.

15
150

2,000
2,000
25

500
500

6:1 ratio
Any detectable amount

Prior to test results being provided to the Department or the Member, the MRO will
compare said test results with the list of prescriptions and over-the-counter
medications provided by the Member pursuant to these procedures.

‘Nanograms per milliliter

223 ng/ml if immunoassay specific for free morphine

42

*Every individual maintains a normal amount of the hormones testosterone and epitestosterone. A
level of testosterone six times greater than the level of epitestosterone is considered a positive result for
testosterone abuse.

4 Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabidol-9-carboxylic acid.

5 Benzoylecgonine.
In the event of a confirmed positive test, the Member will be required to submit a
copy of the prescription and the verification from the prescribing physician for any
prescription medication declared by the Member in the pre-test interview required by
these procedures.

The MRO may interview the Member, review medical history, consult with
laboratory personnel and order re-testing as determined to be necessary.

If no alternative medical explanation can be determined, the test will be designate as
verified positive by the MRO.

e. The MRO will report all results to the Commander of Special Investigations, who
will forward the results to the Chief of Police. Upon review, the Chief of Police will
determine appropriate action and provide notification to the Member.

4. Disciplinary Action.
A Member who tests positive for illegal drugs shall be subject to discharge.

5. Employee Assistance Program.

Metro Government shall provide an Employee Assistance Program. Voluntary requests for
assistance with drug problems shall be held strictly confidential by the Employee Assistance
Program to the extent required by law and the terms of this Agreement. EAP Administrator and
EAP staff assigned to a Member’s case shall be the only persons informed of any such request or
any treatment that may be given and they shall hold such information strictly confidential to the
extent required by law. A Member voluntarily seeking assistance shall not be disciplined under this
Agreement for seeking such assistance.

6. Records Retention and Use

Records of a positive drug test or refusal to submit to such test as provided in this
Agreement shall be maintained from the date of the incident which gave rise to the positive test or
refusal until final disposition of any grievance, Police Merit Board appeal or appeal thereof. All
such records shall not be utilized for any purpose after one (1) year from the date of the incident that
gave rise to the positive test or refusal, so long as there is no subsequent positive test or refusal to
submit to a test.

7. Changes in Testing Procedure.
The parties recognize that during the life of this Agreement, there may be improvements in the
technology of testing procedures that provide more accurate testing. In that event, the parties will
discuss and agree to any such improvements. If the parties are unable to agree, the procedure shall
remain unchanged.

43
Police Sergeant

Police Officer

Start lyr 2-3 yrs

STEP1 STEP2 STEP3

17.06 18.87 22.02
35484.80 39249.60 45801.60

APPENDIX 2 - WAGE AND LONGEVITY SCHEDULE
July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2013

4.5 yrs

STEP 1
27.02
$6201.60

STEP 4

22.45
46696.00

6-7 yrs

STEP 2
27.48
§7518.40

STEP 5

22.84
47507.20

8-9 yrs

STEP 3
27.99
58219.20

STEP 6

23.26
48380.80

10-11 yrs

STEP 4
28.51
59300.80

STEP7

23.70
49296.00

44

12-13 yrs

STEP 5
28.98
60278.40

STEP 8

24.16
50252.80

14-15 yrs

STEP 6
29.53
61422.40

STEP 9

24.59
51147.20

16-17 yrs

STEP7
30.05
62504,00

STEP 10

25.06
52124.80

18-19 yrs

STEP 8
30.59
63627.20

STEP 11

25.52
53081.60

20-21 yrs

STEP 9
31.12
64729.60

STEP 12

25.97
54017.60

22-23 yrs

STEP 10
31.72
65977.60

STEP 13

26.48
55078.40

24+ yrs

STEP 11
32.30
67184.00

STEP 14

26.99
56139.20
APPENDIX 3 —- LEASE

THIS LEASE, made this Ist day of July, 2011, between LOUISVILLE/JEFFERSON
COUNTY METRO GOVERNMENT (“Metro Government”) and the RIVER CITY FRATERNAL
ORDER OF POLICE, LODGE NO. 614 (the “Lodge”).

WITNESSETH:

That Metro Government hereby leases to the Lodge approximately 24,800 square feet in the
S.W. corner of the block bounded by 8th, 9th, Jefferson and Liberty Streets for the period of one (1)
year and covenants to keep the tenant in quiet possession of the premises during said term. The said
property (herein after the “Premises”) is to be used as a parking lot and nothing else for FOP
Members subject to a development proposal set forth herein.

IN CONSIDERATION WHEREOF, the Lodge shall pay One Dollar ($1.00) at the date
the lease is signed of each and every year being at the rate of One Dollar ($1.00) per annum; to take
good care of the Premises and return the same, at the expiration of said time, in as good order as
received, ordinary wear and tear and natural decay expected, unless the improvements should be
destroyed by lightning or other natural causes, or fire not caused by Lodge’s default; and not to
erect or permit to be erected on the Premises any nuisance, or commit any waste.

The following additional stipulations are hereby declared to be part of this Lease:

1. The Lodge shall not at any time use the Premises, or permit it to be used, in such a
manner as to increase the risk of liability.

2. In case of a violation of clause 1 on the part of the Lodge, it agrees to pay Metro
Government, as damages, the increased insurance and in case the Premises are so used that Metro

Government cannot insure it, the Lodge agrees to become the insurer thereof.
3. The Lodge covenants to comply with all laws and ordinances in regard to nuisances,
insofar as the Premises are concerned, and that it will not by any act of its own, render Metro
Government liable therefore; that no rubbish or waste or other refuse matter shall be thrown into or
upon the Premises; and if it is, besides other reparation, the Lodge shall have the lot cleaned.

4. Should the Lodge continue to occupy the Premises after the expiration of said term, or
after a forfeiture incurred, whether with or against the consent of Metro Government, such tenancy
shall be in accordance with the terms of this Lease.

5. Should Metro Government at any time rightfully seek to recover possession of the
Premises, and be obstructed or resisted therein, and any litigation thereon ensue, the Lodge shall
pay and discharge all costs and attorney's fees and expenses that shall arise from enforcing the
covenants of this indenture by Metro Government.

6. This Lease, at the option of Metro Government, shall be void and forfeited in case of any
violation of any covenant herein contained.

7. Metro Government shall have free access to the premises herein leased for the purpose of
examining or exhibiting same, or to make any needed repairs or alterations of said Premises that
Metro Government may deem necessary.

8. No signs shall be erected upon the property without consent of Metro Government and
when done by agreement, the Lodge is to remove it, at its expense, all signs at expiration of Lease.

9. The Lodge agrees to indemnify and hold harmless Metro Government for all acts or
omissions occurring on the Premises that result in property damage or personal injury. The Lodge

agrees to defend said claim at its own expense.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have affixed their signatures this BH tay of

Daly, 2013.

LOUISVILLE/JEFFERSON COUNTY METRO GOVERNMENT

By:
REG BISC
MAYOR

ER

   

n

Date: 7 3 20/3

RIVER CITY FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, LODGE 614

4

   

By: /
DAVID MUTCHLER
PRESIDENT

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

L,

MICHAEL O’CONNELL
JEFFERSON COUNTY ATTORNEY

Date: b/de/ 13
