AGREEMENT BETWEEN

THE CITY OF CHICAGO
DEPARTMENT OF POLICE

AND THE

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
CHICAGO LODGE NO. 7

EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012
THROUGH JUNE 30, 2017

Rahm Emanuel Garry F. McCarthy
Mayor Superintendent
ARTICLE 1— PREAMBLE

This Agreement is entered into by and between the City of Chicago, an Illinois municipal
corporation (hereinafter referred to as the "Employer") and the Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago
Lodge No. 7 (hereinafter referred to as the "Lodge").

It is the purpose of this Agreement and it is the intent of the parties hereto to establish and
promote mutual harmonious understanding and relationships between the Employer and the
Lodge, to promote departmental efficiency and effectiveness, to establish wages, hours,
standards and other terms and conditions of employment for Officers covered by this Agreement,
and to provide for the equitable and peaceful adjustment and resolution of differences which may
arise from time to time over the negotiations, interpretation and application of this Agreement.

In consideration of the mutual promises, covenants and agreements contained herein, the parties
hereto, by their duly authorized representative and/or agents, do mutually covenant and agree as
follows:

ARTICLE 2 — RECOGNITION

The Employer recognizes the Lodge as the sole and exclusive collective bargaining representative
for all sworn Police Officers below the rank of sergeant (herein referred to as "Officer") excluding
probationary officers employed by the Employer in its Department of Police, provided said
probationary period shall not extend beyond an eighteen (18) month period.

The normal probationary period shall consist of eighteen (18) months of actual presence during
active duty. Consequently, time absent from duty or not served, for any reason, shall not apply
toward satisfaction of the probationary period, except as provided in Appendix P. During the
probationary period, an officer is not entitled to any rights, privileges or benefits under this
Agreement, except as provided in Appendix P.

Officers covered by the Agreement who have completed their probationary period as defined in
Article 2 of the Agreement and thereafter commence disability or approved leaves of absence but
subsequently return to active duty shall not be considered probationary and shall be entitled to all
rights and benefits provided for in the Agreement, including, but not limited to, the right to invoke
the provisions of Article 9 of the Agreement.

ARTICLE 3 — LODGE SECURITY
Section 3.1 — Maintenance of Membership and Agency Shop

A. Each Officer who on the effective date of this Agreement is a member of the Lodge, and each
Officer who becomes a member after that date, shall, as a condition of employment, maintain
their membership in good standing in the Lodge during the term of this Agreement.

B. Any present Officer who is not a member of the Lodge shall, as a condition of employment, be
required to pay fair share (not to exceed the amount of Lodge dues) of the cost of the collective
bargaining process and contract administration. All Officers hired on or after the effective date
of this Agreement and who have not made application for membership shall, on or after the
thirtieth day following the completion of their probationary period, also be required to pay a
fair share of the cost of the collective bargaining process and contract administration.

Section 3.2 — Lodge Presentation at Orientation

With respect to new officers, the Employer shall provide the Lodge with written notice of a
class of new officers and shall, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties in writing, provide the

1
Lodge with access to the new officers on the day when the new officers are presented with
benefits information, which typically occurs no later than the conclusion of the second week of
classes at the Academy. The Employer shall also grant the Lodge an opportunity during the
orientation of new officers to present the benefits of membership in the Lodge.

Section 3.3 — Dues Deduction

A. With respect to any Officer on whose behalf the Employer receives written authorization in a
form agreed upon by the Lodge and the Employer, the Employer shall deduct from the wages
of the Officer the dues and/or financial obligations uniformly required and shall forward the
full amount to the Lodge by the tenth (10th) day of the month following the month in which the
deductions are made. The amounts deducted shall be in accordance with a schedule to be
submitted to the Employer by the Lodge. Authorization for such deduction shall be irrevocable
unless revoked by written notice to the Employer and the Lodge during the fifteen (15) day
period prior to the expiration of this contract. The Employer will not similarly deduct the dues
of any other organization as to Officers covered by this Agreement.

B. With respect to any Officer on whose behalf the Employer has not received a written
authorization as provided for in Section 3.3A above, the Employer shall deduct from the wages
of the Officer, the fair share financial obligation, including any retroactive amount due and
owing, and shall forward said amount to the Lodge by the tenth (10th) day of the month
following the month in which the deduction is made, subject only to the following:

1. The Lodge has certified to the Employer that the affected Officer has been delinquent in
his or her obligation for at least sixty (60) days;

2. The Lodge has certified to the Employer that the affected Officer has been notified in
writing of the obligation and the requirement of each provision of this Article;

3. The Lodge has certified to the Employer that the affected Officer has been given a
reasonable opportunity to prepare and submit any objections to the payment and has been
afforded an opportunity to appear before the Board of Directors of the Lodge or its
designee for the purpose of being heard on said objections.

Section 3.4 — Indemnity

The Lodge shall indemnify and save the Employer harmless against any and all claims, demands,
suits or other forms of liability that shall arise out of, or by reason of, action taken by the Employer
for the purpose of complying with the above provisions of this Article, or in reliance on any list,
notices, certification or assignment furnished under any of such provisions.

ARTICLE 4 — MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

The Employer has and will continue to retain the right to operate and manage its affairs in each and
every respect. The rights reserved to the sole discretion of the Employer shall include, but not be
limited to, rights:

A. to determine the organization and operations of the Department of Police;

B. to determine and change the purpose, composition and function of each of its constituent
departments, and subdivisions;

a

to set standards for the services to be offered to the public;

D. to direct the Officers of the Department of Police, including the right to assign work and
overtime;
E. to hire, examine, classify, select, promote, restore to career service positions, train, transfer,
assign and schedule Officers;
F. to increase, reduce or change, modify or alter the composition and size of the work force,

including the right to relieve employees from duties because of lack of work or funds or other
proper reasons;

a

to contract out work when essential in the exercise of police power;

H. to establish work schedules and to determine the starting and quitting time, and the number of
hours to be worked;

I. to establish, modify, combine or abolish job positions and classifications;
J. to add, delete or alter methods of operation, equipment or facilities;

K. to determine the locations, methods, means, and personnel by which the operations are to be
conducted, including the right to determine whether goods or services are to be made, provided
or purchased;

L. to establish, implement and maintain an effective internal control program;

M. to suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action against Officers for just cause;
and

N. to add, delete or alter policies, procedures, rules and regulations.

Inherent managerial functions, prerogatives and policymaking rights, whether listed above or not,
which the Employer has not expressly restricted by a specific provision of this Agreement are not in
any way, directly or indirectly, subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures contained herein,
provided that no right is exercised contrary to or inconsistent with other terms of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 5 — NO STRIKE

Section 5.1 — No Strike Commitment

Neither the Lodge nor any Officer will call, institute, authorize, participate in, sanction, encourage,
or ratify any strike, work stoppage, or other concerted refusal to perform duties by any Officer or
Officer group, or the concerted interference with, in whole or in part, the full, faithful and proper
performance of the duties of employment with the Employer. Neither the Lodge nor any Officer
shall refuse to cross any picket line, by whomever established.

Section 5.2 — Resumption of Operations

In the event of action prohibited by Section 5.1 above, the Lodge immediately shall disavow such
action and request the Officers to return to work, and shall use its best efforts to achieve a prompt
resumption of normal operations. The Lodge, including its officials and agents, shall not be liable
for any damages, direct or indirect, upon complying with the requirements of this Section.

Section 5.3 — Union Liability

Upon the failure of the Lodge to comply with the provisions of Section 5.2 above, any agent or

official of the Lodge who is an Officer covered by this Agreement may be subject to the provisions

of Section 5.4 below.

Section 5.4 — Discipline of Strikers

Any Officer who violates the provisions of Section 5.1 of this Article shall be subject to

immediate discharge. Any action taken by the Employer against any Officer who participates in
3
action prohibited by Section 5.1 above shall not be considered as a violation of this Agreement
and shall not be subject to the provisions of the grievance procedure; except that the issue
whether an Officer in fact participated in a prohibited action shall be subject to the grievance and
arbitration procedure.

ARTICLE 6 — BILL OF RIGHTS

Section 6.1 — Conduct of Disciplinary Investigation

All complaints against an Officer covered by this Agreement shall be processed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Appendix L.

Whenever an Officer covered by this Agreement is the subject of a disciplinary investigation other
than Summary Punishment, the interrogation will be conducted in the following manner:

A.

The interrogation of the Officer, other than in the initial stage of the investigation, shall be
scheduled at a reasonable time, preferably while the Officer is on duty, or if feasible, during
daylight hours.

The interrogation, depending upon the allegation, will normally take place at
the Officer's unit of assignment, the Independent Police Review Authority (“IPRA”), the
Internal Affairs Division (“IAD”) or other appropriate location.

Prior to an interrogation, the Officer under investigation shall be informed of the identities of:
the person in charge of the investigation, the designated primary interrogation officer, the
designated secondary interrogation officer, if any, and all persons present during the
interrogation and shall be advised whether the interrogation will be audio recorded. When a
formal statement is being taken, questions directed to the Officer under interrogation shall first
be asked by the designated primary interrogator. Unless both parties agree, no more than
two members of IPRA or IAD will be present in the interview room during questioning. A
secondary interrogator may participate in the interrogation, provided that the secondary
interrogator shall be present for the entire interrogation. The secondary interrogator will
not ask any questions until the primary interrogator has finished asking questions and
invites the secondary interrogator to ask questions. Generally, the secondary interrogator
will ask follow-up questions for clarification purposes. The primary interrogator will not
ask any questions until the secondary interrogator has finished asking questions and
invites the primary interrogator to ask follow-up questions.

Unless the Superintendent of Police specifically authorizes in writing, no complaint or
allegation of any misconduct concerning any incident or event which occurred five (5) years
prior to the date the complaint or allegation became known to the Department shall be made the
subject of a Complaint Register investigation or be re-opened or re-investigated after five (5)
years from the date the Compliant Register number was issued.

 

No anonymous complaint made against an Officer shall be made the subject of a Complaint
Register investigation unless the allegation is a violation of the Illinois Criminal Code, the
criminal code of another state of the United States or a criminal violation of a federal statute.

No anonymous complaint regarding residency or medical roll abuse shall be made the subject
of a Complaint Register investigation until verified. No ramifications will result regarding
issues other than residency or medical roll abuse from information discovered during an
investigation of an anonymous complaint regarding residency or medical roll abuse, unless of a
criminal nature as defined in the preceding paragraph.
Immediately prior to the interrogation of an Officer under investigation, he or she shall be
informed in writing of the nature of the complaint and the names of all complainants.

The length of interrogation sessions will be reasonable, with reasonable interruptions
permitted for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls and rest.

An Officer under interrogation shall not be threatened with transfer, dismissal or disciplinary
action or promised a reward as an inducement to provide information relating to the incident
under investigation or for exercising any rights contained herein. The Department shall not
retaliate in any manner against any Officer covered by this Agreement who cooperates in a
Department disciplinary investigation.

An Officer under investigation will be provided with a copy of any and all statements he or
she has made that are audio recorded or in writing within seventy-two (72) hours of the time
the statement was made. In the event a re-interrogation of the Officer is required within the
seventy-two- (72-) hour period following the initial interrogation, the Officer will be
provided with a copy of any prior statements before the subsequent interrogation.

If the allegation under investigation indicates a recommendation for separation is probable
against the Officer, the Officer will be given the statutory administrative proceedings rights,
or if the allegation indicates criminal prosecution is probable against the Officer, the Officer
will be given the constitutional rights concerning self-incrimination prior to the
commencement of interrogation.

An Officer under interrogation shall have the right to be represented by counsel of his or her
own choice and to have that counsel present at all times during the interrogation, and/or at the
request of the Officer under interrogation, he or she shall have the right to be represented by a
representative of the Lodge, who shall be either an Officer on leave to work for the Lodge or a
retired Officer working for the Lodge. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable
time until representation can be obtained.

The provisions of this Agreement shall be deemed to authorize the Employer, IPRA and IAD
to require Officers under interrogation to provide audio recorded statements, provided that the
provisions in Section 6.1 are satisfied.

If an Officer provides a statement during the investigation conducted promptly following a
shooting incident and then is later interrogated by the Employer, IPRA or IAD as part of an
investigation related to such incident, the Officer shall be provide with a copy of the portion of
any official report that purportedly summarizes his or her prior statement before the
interrogation.

. If, prior to taking an Officer’s statement, the Employer, IPRA or IAD is in possession of
video or audio evidence relevant to the matter under investigation, it may, in its
discretion, elect to advise or not to advise the Officer of such fact and, further, may allow
or not allow the Officer an opportunity to review the video or audio evidence prior to
taking the Officer’s statement. An Officer who is not allowed to review the video or audio
evidence prior to giving a statement shall not be charged with a Rule 14 violation unless
the Officer has been presented with the video or audio evidence and given the opportunity
to clarify and amend the Officer’s original statement. In any event, the Employer shall
not charge an Officer with a Rule 14 violation unless it has determined that: (1) the
Officer willfully made a false statement; and (2) the false statement was made about a fact
that was material to the incident under investigation.
When the Department relieves an Officer of police powers, except in instances involving
confidential investigations, the Department shall be required to give that Officer written
notification of the category of the allegations or events that have caused the Officer to be
relieved of police powers. Said notification shall be given at the time that the Officer is
relieved of police powers.

Section 6.2 — Witness Officer's Statements in Disciplinary Investigations

When an Officer covered by this Agreement is required to give a statement, in the presence of an
observer, as a witness in a disciplinary investigation other than Summary Punishment, or as a
witness in a police-related shooting investigation, at the request of the Officer the interview shall be
conducted in the following manner:

A.

B.

The interview of the Officer shall be scheduled at a reasonable time, preferably while the
Officer is on duty, or if feasible, during daylight hours.

The interview, depending on the nature of the investigation, will normally take place at the
Officer's unit of assignment, IPRA, IAD or other appropriate location.

Prior to an interview, the Officer being interviewed shall be informed of the identities of: the
person in charge of the investigation, the designated primary interviewing officer, the
designated secondary interviewing officer, if any, and all persons present during the
interview; whether the interview is being audio recorded; and the nature of the complaint,
including the date, time, location and relevant R.D. number, if known. When a formal
statement is being taken, questions directed to the Officer being interviewed shall be first
asked by the designated primary interviewer. Unless both parties agree, no more than two
members of IPRA or IAD will be present in the interview room during questioning. A
secondary interviewer may participate in the interview, provided that the secondary
interviewer shall be present for the entire interview. The secondary interviewer will not
ask any questions until the primary interviewer has finished asking questions and invites
the secondary interviewer to ask questions. Generally, the secondary interviewer will ask
follow-up questions for clarification purposes. The primary interviewer will not ask any
questions until the secondary interviewer has finished asking questions and invites the
primary interviewer to ask follow-up questions.

The Officer will be provided with a copy of any and all statements he or she has made that are
audio recorded or in writing within seventy-two (72) hours of the time the statement was made.
In the event a re-interview of an Officer is required within the seventy-two (72) hour period
following the initial interview, the Officer will be provided with a copy of such statements
before the subsequent interview.

An Officer being interviewed pursuant to this section shall, upon his or her request, have the
right to be represented by counsel of his or her own choice and to have that counsel present at
all times during the interview, or at the request of the Officer being interviewed, he or she
shall have the right to be represented by a representative of the Lodge who shall be either an
Officer on leave to work for the Lodge or a retired Officer working for the Lodge. For
purposes of this paragraph E, "represented" shall mean that the Officer's counsel and/or
representative shall only advise the Officer but shall not in any way interfere with the
interview. The interview shall be postponed for a reasonable time, but in no case more than
forty-eight (48) hours from the time the Officer is informed of the request for an interview
and the general subject matter thereof and his or her counsel or representative can be present.
Interviews in shooting cases may be postponed for no more than two hours; provided,

6
however, that if a witness Officer advances a claim that he or she is physically or
emotionally unable to provide a statement within the two hour time period, then IPRA
will deal with such claims on an individual basis, making a reasonable inquiry into the
reasons for the Officer’s claim, and accepting at face value all good faith claims of an
Officer’s inability to provide a statement.

F. This Section 6.2 shall not apply to: questions from a supervisor in the course of performing his
or her normal day-to-day supervisory duties or to requests to prepare detailed reports or To-
From-Subject Reports, except To-From-Subject Reports that relate to the police-related
shooting.

G. The length of interviews will be reasonable, with reasonable interruptions permitted for
personal necessities, meals, telephone calls and rest.

H. The provision of this Agreement shall be deemed to authorize the Employer, IPRA and IAD
to require Officers being interviewed to provide audio recorded statements, provided that the
provision in Section 6.2 are satisfied.

I. If an Officer provides a statement during the investigation conducted promptly following a
shooting incident and then is later interviewed by the Employer, IPRA or IAD as part of an
investigation related to such incident, the Officer shall be provided with a copy of the portion
of any official report that purportedly summarizes his or her prior statement before the
interview.

J. If, prior to taking an Officer’s statement, the Employer, IPRA or IAD is in possession of
video or audio evidence relevant to the matter under investigation, it may, in its
discretion, elect to advise or not to advise the Officer of such fact and, further, may allow
or not allow the Officer an opportunity to review the video or audio evidence prior to
taking the Officer’s statement. An Officer who is not allowed to review the video or audio
evidence prior to giving a statement shall not be charged with a Rule 14 violation unless
the Officer has been presented with the video or audio evidence and given the opportunity
to clarify and amend the Officer’s original statement. In any event, the Employer shall
not charge an Officer with a Rule 14 violation unless it has determined that: (1) the
Officer willfully made a false statement; and (2) the false statement was made about a fact
that was material to the incident under investigation.

Section 6.3 — Non-Adoption of Ordinance

The City of Chicago shall not adopt any ordinance and the Department shall not adopt any
regulation which prohibits the right of an Officer to bring suit arising out of his or her duties as an
Officer.

Section 6.4 — Photo Dissemination

No photo of an Officer under investigation shall be made available to the media prior to a
conviction for a criminal offense or prior to a decision being rendered by the Police Board, except
where required by law.

Section 6.5 — Compulsion of Testimony

The Department shall not compel an Officer under investigation to speak or testify before, or to be

questioned by any nongovernmental agency relating to any matter or issue under investigation.

Section 6.6 —Auto-Residency Card.

No Officer shall be required to submit the information now required in an Auto-Residency Card as it
7
applies to any other member of his or her family or household.

Section 6.7 — Polygraph

No Officer shall be disciplined for refusal to take a polygraph exam and the results of the polygraph
exam shall not be admissible as evidence in proceedings before the Police Board or in any
proceeding where the Officer may appeal to the Police Board, unless by Illinois or Federal Court
decision or statute, such evidence shall become admissible before the Police Board.

In the event that the results of a polygraph exam become admissible as evidence before the Police
Board and the Department determines a polygraph exam is necessary, the complainant will be
requested to take a polygraph exam first. If the complainant refuses to take a polygraph exam, the
accused police Officer will not be requested to take a polygraph exam. If the complainant takes the
polygraph exam and the results indicate deception, the accused Officer may be requested to take a
polygraph exam covering those issues wherein the examiner determines that the complainant is
truthful.

When the polygraph is used, the accused member will be advised twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
administering of the test, in writing, of any questions to which the Department will request an
answer.

Section 6.8 — Disclosure

An Officer shall not be required to disclose any item of his or her property, income, assets, source
of income, debts, or personal or domestic expenditures (including those of any member of his or her
family or household) unless such information is reasonably necessary to monitor the performance of
the Officer's job, violations of reasonable Employer rules, statutes, ordinances, or this Agreement.
In the administration of fringe benefits applicable to all employees of the Employer, Officers
covered by this Agreement may be required to disclose any coverage they (including any member
of their families or households) may have under health or medical insurance and the name and
appropriate identification of the carrier and coverage. The parties agree that the disclosure of such
personal information shall not be made available for public inspection or copying because such
would be an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy of the Officer, and/or is intended to
otherwise be exempt from any state or local freedom of information statute, ordinance or executive
order.

Section 6.9 — Media Information Restrictions

The identity of an Officer under investigation shall not be made available to the media unless there
has been a criminal conviction or a decision has been rendered by the Police Board (or by the
Superintendent), except where required by law. However, if the Officer is found innocent, the
Officer may request and the Department shall issue a public statement.

Section 6.10 — Prohibition on Use and Disclosure of Social Security Numbers

The Social Security Number of an Officer covered by this Agreement shall not be disclosed and
shall not be included on documents, except those essential for payroll or compensation purposes.

Section 6.11 — Mediation

At any time during an investigation, the parties may agree to mediate the resolution of the
Complaint Register investigation. The "parties" shall mean the accused Officer, with or without
his or her Lodge representative, and a representative of IAD or IPRA, as appropriate. The
IAD/IPRA investigator assigned to the case will not be present at the mediation.
 

Prior to the mediation s on, IAD/IPRA shall cause the accused Officer to be served with a Notice
of Administrative Rights and a Notice of Charges and Allegations, which will include the rule
violation and the factual basis therefore. Neither party is required to meet.

 

The representatives at the meeting shall discuss the allegations and IAD's/IPRA's position regarding
the finding of the case. The parties shall discuss whether they can reach accord as to a disposition.
By accepting the discipline, the accused Officer is waiving his or her right to grieve or appeal the
decision, and the accused Officer is not required to submit any statement or response. If the accused
Officer does not agree with IAD's/IPRA's position, the disciplinary process will continue as
designated.

 
   

 

Statements made and information relayed at the mediation which are not included in the file will not
be used against the Officer or included in the file at any later date.

If IAD/IPRA and the accused Officer agree on a penalty less than separation, it is binding on both
parties. However, the Superintendent retains the right to seek the separation of an Officer.
Section 6.12 — Review Procedures

The procedures for the review of recommendations for discipline, such as Command Channel
Review, and the procedures by which Officers covered by the Agreement may challenge the
recommendation and imposition of discipline which currently exist will continue to exist and be
available to said Officers except as expressly modified or eliminated as set forth in the
Agreement.

ARTICLE 7 — SUMMARY PUNISHMENT

Section 7.1 —Administration of Summary Punishment

It is agreed that the provisions contained elsewhere in this Agreement shall not apply to Summary
Punishment action, which action shall be considered an alternative to formal disciplinary
procedures, provided that in each such action the following shall apply:

 

A. The Summary Punishment which may be administered conforms to the "Notice to Supervisors
Regarding Progressive Discipline,” as set forth in this Agreement, and is limited to:
1. reprimand;
2. excusing a member for a minimum of one day to a maximum of three

days without pay.

In all instances, the Summary Punishment shall be satisfied by deducting the equivalent
of day(s) off without pay from the Officer’s accumulated compensatory time or, at the
Officer’s sole discretion, by deducting the equivalent of day(s) off without pay from the
Officer’s furlough, personal days, or baby furlough days. In all instances, eight hours of
accumulated elective time, including compensatory time, furlough, personal days, and
baby furlough days, shall be equal to one day off without pay. If the Officer does not
have sufficient accumulated compensatory time, then the days off shall be satisfied by
means of days off without pay, unless the Officer elects to use his furlough, personal
days, or baby furlough days.

B. The Department shall promulgate, maintain and publicize reasonable guidelines which will
specify those acts, omissions or transgressions, the violation of which will subject an Officer
to Summary Punishment action, and the penalties for each such violation, which shall be
uniformly applied.

  
Section 7.2 — Challenge of Summary Punishment

After Summary Punishment has been administered three (3) times within a twelve (12) month
period, an Officer who wishes to contest the application of Summary Punishment on a fourth
occasion within the last twelve (12) months may contest the fourth and/or succeeding applications
of Summary Punishment by timely challenge through the Complaint Register process or the
grievance procedure.

ARTICLE 8 — EMPLOYEE SECURITY
Section 8.1 — Just Cause Standard

No Officer covered by this Agreement shall be suspended, relieved from duty or otherwise
disciplined in any manner without just cause.

Section 8.2 — File Inspection

The Employer's personnel files, disciplinary history files and completed inactive investigative files,
except for information which the Employer deems to be confidential, shall be open and available for
inspection by the affected Officer during regular business hours.

Section 8.3 — Limitation on Use of File Material

It is agreed that any material and/or matter not available for inspection, such as provided in Section
8.2 above, shall not be used in any manner or any forum adverse to the Officer's interests.

Section 8.4 — Use and Destruction of File Material

All disciplinary investigation files, disciplinary history card entries, IPRA and IAD disciplinary
records, and any other disciplinary record or summary of such record other than records related to
Police Board cases, will be destroyed five (5) years after the date of the incident or the date upon
which the violation is discovered, whichever is longer, except that not sustained files alleging
criminal conduct or excessive force shall be retained for a period of seven (7) years after the date of
the incident or the date upon which the violation is discovered, whichever is longer, and thereafter,
cannot be used against the Officer in any future proceedings in any other forum, except as specified
below, unless the investigation relates to a matter which has been subject to either civil or criminal
court litigation or arbitration prior to the expiration of the five- (5-) year period. In such instances,
the Complaint Register case files normally will be destroyed immediately after the date of the final
arbitration award or the final court adjudication, unless a pattern of sustained infractions exists.

Any information of an adverse employment nature which may be contained in any unfounded,
exonerated, or otherwise not sustained file, shall not be used against the Officer in any future
proceedings. Information contained in files alleging excessive force or criminal conduct which are
not sustained may be used in future disciplinary proceedings to determine credibility and notice.

A finding of "Sustained — Violation Noted, No Disciplinary Action" entered upon a member's
disciplinary record or any record of Summary Punishment may be used for a period of time not to
exceed one (1) year and shall thereafter be removed from the Officer's disciplinary record and not
used to support or as evidence of adverse employment action. The Department's finding of
"Sustained — Violation Noted, No Disciplinary Action" is not subject to the grievance procedure.

Reprimands and suspensions of one (1) to five (5) days will stay on the Officer’s disciplinary
history for a period of three (3) years from the last date of suspension or date of reprimand, or
five (5) years from the date of the incident, whichever is earlier.

10
Information relating to a preventable traffic accident involving a Department Vehicle may be used
and/or considered in determining future discipline for a period of time not to exceed two (2) years
from the date of such preventable traffic accident and shall thereafter not be used and/or considered
in any employment action provided there is no intervening preventable traffic accident involving a
Department Vehicle and if there is, the two-year period shall continue to run from the date of the
most recent preventable traffic accident and any prior incidents may be used and/or considered in
employment actions. In no event shall any prior incident five (5) or more years old be used and/or
considered.

Section 8.5 — Notification

In the event the Employer receives subpoena or other legal process requiring the inspection, tender
or submission of personnel, disciplinary or investigative records and/or files (other than Grand Jury
subpoena or other subpoena or process which would preclude disclosure), the Employer will
promptly send a copy of such subpoena or process to the Officer whose records have been
requested and to the Lodge. However, failure to furnish such notice shall not in any way affect the
validity of any disciplinary action or personnel action taken by the Employer, provided that the
Lodge will not be barred from asserting and does not waive any right(s) an Officer may have to
inspect or to otherwise challenge the use of files under applicable rules, statutes or this Agreement
including Article 8.

Section 8.6 — Detectives, Evidence Technicians, Police Laboratory Technicians, Forensic
Investigators and Field Training Officers

The Employer agrees not to remove Officers in the position of Detective except for just cause.

During this Agreement, the Employer agrees that the ranks of Detective, Evidence Technician,
Police Laboratory Technician, Forensic Investigator and Field Training Officer will not be
eliminated from the budget.

Section 8.7 — Tactical Response Reports (TRR)

The number of Tactical Response Reports (TRR), in and of itself, will not be used for disciplinary
purposes.

Section 8.8 — Superintendent's Authority

The Superintendent's authority to suspend an Officer, as set forth in section 2-84030 of the
Municipal Code of Chicago, shall be increased from the current limit not to exceed thirty (30) days,
to a limit not to exceed three hundred and sixty-five (365) days.

In cases where the Superintendent seeks an Officer's separation from the Department, the
Superintendent's current and past practice of suspending Officers for thirty (30) days and filing
charges with the Police Board seeking the Officer's separation will not change.

ARTICLE 9 — GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 9.1 — Definition and Scope

A grievance is defined as a dispute or difference between the parties to this Agreement concerning
interpretation and/or application of this Agreement or its provisions. Summary Punishment shall be
excluded from this procedure, except as provided in Article 7.2. The separation of an Officer from
service is cognizable only before the Police Board and shall not be cognizable under this procedure,
provided, however, that the provisions of Article 17 shall be applicable to separations.
Section 9.2 — Procedures, Steps and Time Limits for Standard Grievances

A grievance may be initiated by the Lodge or an aggrieved Officer. Any Officer shall have the right
to present a grievance at any time, although it is understood that the Officer should attempt to
satisfy his or her concerns on an informal basis before invoking the procedure. In the event an
informal resolution proves to be unsatisfactory, a grievance may be filed in a form to be agreed
upon between the Lodge and Employer and shall be processed in accordance with this Agreement.
Upon request, the grievant shall be represented by an appropriate Lodge representative, provided,
however, the grievant Officer may have the grievance adjusted without a Lodge representative, so
long as such adjustment is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

Step One: Initiating a Grievance. The grievant will first submit his or her grievance in writing to
his or her immediate supervisor in his or her unit of assignment within seven (7) of the Officer's
working days following the events or circumstances giving rise to the grievance or where first
known by the grievant, or thirty-five (35) days, whichever period is shorter. The grievance will be
reduced to writing on a pre-printed, standard grievance form set agreed upon between the Lodge
and Employer.

 

Step Two: Supervisory Responses. Within seven (7) days of receipt of the member's grievance, the
supervisor will respond to the grievance on the grievance form set and then immediately present
the grievance form set to the Commanding Officer of the unit of assignment. Following the
submission of the written grievance, the Commanding Officer shall render a decision in writing
within fourteen (14) days of receiving the grievance. The response shall be written on the bottom
portion of the pre-printed, standard grievance form set. The Commanding Officer must forward
one (1) copy of his or her decision to the grievant, one (1) copy to the Lodge's unit representative,
and three (3) copies to Management and Labor Affairs Section (MLAS). MLAS will then forward
to the Lodge a copy of the Commanding Officer's decision within fourteen (14) days of its receipt.
If the grievant is directed by the Employer to meet concerning his or her grievance at a time when
the Officer is not scheduled to work, he or she shall be compensated for such time at the applicable
rate provided for in this Agreement, including the provisions of Article 20.

Step Three: Mediation. If the response at Step Two is not satisfactory to the grievant and the
Lodge, the Lodge and MLAS will meet for the purpose of mediation of the grievance. Either
party may request the presence of a Mediator at such meeting, the selection of whom shall be
mutually agreed upon. The mediation meeting shall be conducted no less than once each month
between the Lodge Grievance Chairman, Lodge President or his or her designee and a
Department representative having authority to resolve the grievance. The parties shall split
evenly the cost of the Mediator's expenses and fees.

Step Four: Arbitration. If the parties cannot resolve the grievance at Step Three, either party may at
any time demand arbitration.

Section 9.3 — Arbitration of Standard Grievances
If either party proceeds to arbitration, the following procedure shall apply:

A. Within ten (10) days, the Employer and the Lodge shall attempt to mutually agree upon an
Arbitrator. If they fail to agree, a list of seven (7) qualified neutrals shall be requested from the
American Arbitration Association. Within five (5) days after receipt of the list, the parties shall
select an Arbitrator. Both the Employer and Lodge each shall alternately strike names from the
list. The remaining person shall be the Arbitrator.

B. The Employer or the Lodge, by mutual agreement, may submit a grievance involving an issue
not otherwise covered under Section 9.6 of this Agreement to expedited arbitration
12
pursuant to the rules set forth in Appendix M or under rules to be determined by the parties
by mutual agreement.

C. The parties shall avoid continuances. Requests for continuances are disfavored and shall be
granted only upon showing good cause.

Section 9.4 — Psychological Review

Grievances concerning involuntary removal from active duty due to psychological or psychiatric
reasons will comply with the following procedures:

Step One: An Officer who wants to challenge the Employer's decision to place him or her
involuntarily on the medical roll will file a grievance with the Medical Services Section within ten
(10) calendar days of being placed on the medical roll, or if the member was on full authorized
furlough during his or her involuntary placement, within thirty-five (35) calendar days of being
placed on the medical roll.

If the Employer's psychiatrist/psychologist recommends that the Officer is fit for full duty and
also was fit when he or she was involuntarily placed on the medical roll due to psychological or
psychiatric reasons, the Officer shall have any paid medical time used during such period of being
involuntarily placed on the medical roll restored and will be made whole for lost pay and other
benefits to which he or she is entitled.

Step Two: For a member who has filed a timely grievance at Step One, and/or when the
Employer's psychiatrist/psychologist recommends that the Officer is unfit for full duty and was
also unfit when he or she was involuntarily placed on the medical roll due to psychological or
psychiatric reasons, then upon written request made by the Lodge within ten (10) calendar days of
notice to the member that he or she is unfit for duty, the Lodge may file a grievance at Step Two
and may request review of that decision by a three-member psychological review panel (“Panel”).
The Officer shall, as promptly as feasible, be evaluated by a panel of three psychiatrists or
psychologists, one appointed by the Lodge, one appointed by the Employer and a third appointed
by mutual agreement of the Employer's and the Lodge's psychiatrist or psychologist
knowledgeable about police duties. This Panel shall have the authority to examine and evaluate the
Officer, and recommend whether or not the Officer is fit for duty. In making its recommendations,
the primary considerations of the Panel shall be the protection and safety of, and need for effective
service to, the public. These considerations shall prevail over all others in any case of conflict of
interests between the Officer and the Employer.

If the Panel recommends that the Officer is fit for duty, and was also fit when he or she was placed
involuntarily on the medical roll due to psychological or psychiatric reasons, then the Officer shall
have any paid medical time used during such involuntary period on the medical roll restored, and
will be made whole for lost pay and other benefits to which he or she is entitled.

If the Panel determines that the member was unfit for duty at the time he or she was involuntarily
placed on the medical roll, but became fit for duty sometime thereafter, the Panel shall identify the
point at which the member was fit for duty and the member will be made whole for lost pay and
benefits from the date that the panel determined he or she was fit for duty.

Each party shall bear the full cost of the Panel member appointed by it, with the cost of the
mutually-appointed Panel member to be split equally between the parties. The recommendations of
the Panel shall be binding upon the Employer, the Lodge and the Officer.

The Lodge and the Employer acknowledge that procedural disputes which prevent the Panel from

going forward with the review process set forth above may arise. The Lodge and the Employer

acknowledge that it is in the best interests of all persons involved in the Psychological Review
13
process to have these procedural disputes resolved as promptly and as fairly as possible. Once such
a procedural dispute arises, the parties will have seven (7) working days to resolve the dispute. If
they cannot resolve the dispute, either party may initiate the Summary Arbitration Process if the
dispute involves the timeliness of the grievance or the period of time which the Panel is to consider
when determining when the Officer became fit. Any other procedural dispute may be submitted to
the Summary Arbitration process only by mutual agreement of the parties. The Lodge and the
Employer will maintain a group of three (3) arbitrators for the Summary Arbitration Process. One
arbitrator will be selected from this group to decide the dispute. The parties will share equally the
cost of the arbitrator. At the earliest possible time, representatives of the Lodge and the Employer
will appear before the arbitrator. Either party may call witnesses, provided notice is given to the
other party before the hearing date is selected. No written briefs will be permitted. No court reporter
will be allowed. The arbitrator will issue a decision within ten (10) working days following the
hearing. The decision of the arbitrator will be binding on the Lodge, the Employer, and the
members of the review Panel. The decision will not set a binding precedent on subsequent
procedural disputes.

Section 9.5 — Medical Grievances

Grievances concerning medical issues (excluding issues covered under Section 9.4) shall follow
the procedure below. Medical issues are defined as grievances involving medical issues, including
but not limited to the nonpayment of I.0.D. bills; removal of an Officer from duty for medical
reasons; refusal to return an Officer to duty from medical roll; classification of an injury as non-
1.0.D. and the Benefits Management Office's denial of payment of medical and hospital bills of an
Officer or his or her covered dependent under the Employer's self-funded health care plan.

Step One: Initiating a Medical Grievance. Grievances concerning the Benefits Management Office's
denial of payment of medical and hospital bills will be filed with the Management and Labor
Affairs Section within ten (10) working days following the events or circumstances giving rise to
the grievance or where first known by the grievant, but in no event later than thirty-five (35)
calendar days following the events or circumstances giving rise to the grievance.

All other grievances concerning medical issues will be filed with the Medical Services Section
within ten (10) working days following the events or circumstances giving rise to the grievance or
where first known by the grievant, but in no event later than thirty-five (35) calendar days
following the events or circumstances giving rise to the grievance. If the determination at Step
One is not satisfactory, the Lodge may by written request made within fifteen (15) days of the
Step One response, or the expiration of the period for said response submit the matter for
mediation.

Step Two: Mediation of Medical Grievances. At mediation, representatives of the Lodge, the Police
Department, the Benefits Management Office and the Finance Committee of the City Council, shall
participate, as needed. Any settlements reached in the mediation proceedings shall be binding upon
the parties. Medical mediation sessions shall occur each thirty (30) days. The parties shall split
evenly the cost of the Mediator's fees and expenses.

 

 

The grievant shall be provided with the relevant medical records within the possession of the
Medical Section, the Committee on Finance, Benefits Management Office and Management &
Labor Affairs Section. A release shall be required for production of medical records. The relevant
medical records shall include the Medical Services Section's determination of the grievant's status
and the response to the grievance. The above records shall be submitted to the Lodge by the
Department within forty-five (45) days of the Department's receipt of the Lodge's releases and
mediation agenda, setting forth the grievants' names. Relevant records from the Medical Section,

14
the Committee on Finance, the Benefits Management Office and Management and Labor Affairs
Section shall be provided as stated above and throughout the grievance process until the grievance
is fully resolved.

Relevant documents to be produced by the Benefits Management Office in mediation are limited
to medical records, claim forms, medical bills, explanation of benefits, and recommendation to
and decision of the Benefits Committee regarding the claim. This definition of relevant records
to be produced by the Benefits Management Office does not preclude the Lodge from
subpoenaing additional relevant documentation in response to the scheduling of an arbitration of
a grievance.

Step Three: Arbitration. If the grievance is not resolved at Step Two, the Lodge upon written
request within thirty (30) days of the date of mediation, may demand arbitration. The Mediator shall
not be selected as the Arbitrator for the same case. The arbitration hearing shall be scheduled to
commence within thirty (30) days of the selection of the Arbitrator unless the parties agree
otherwise. Within ten (10) days of the Lodge's demand for arbitration, the Employer and Lodge
shall attempt to mutually agree upon an Arbitrator. If they fail to agree, a list of seven qualified
neutrals shall be requested from the American Arbitration Association. Within five (5) days after
receipt of the list, the parties shall select an Arbitrator. Both the Employer and the Lodge shall
alternately strike names from the list. The remaining person shall be the Arbitrator.

Section 9.6 — Suspension Grievances

Grievances challenging reprimands and recommendations for suspension (excluding Summary
Punishment except as specified in Section 7.2 and suspensions accompanied by a recommendation
for separation) will comply with the following procedures:

A. Reprimands and Suspensions from One (1) to Ten (10) Days

Officers who receive a reprimand or a recommendation for suspension from one (1) to
ten (10) days as a result of a sustained Complaint Register investigation (CR#) shall
have one of two (2) options. Within ten (10) working days of receiving the reprimand
or recommendation for discipline, the Officer shall elect one of the following options:

1. Submission of a grievance to the Summary Opinion process challenging the
reprimand or recommendation for discipline. An Arbitrator designated by the
parties shall issue a Summary Opinion, in accordance with the standard
procedures employed by the parties and their mutual past practices, which shall
be final and binding on the parties and there shall be no further review of the
reprimand or suspension under this Agreement. The Officer will not be
required to serve the recommended suspension, nor will the reprimand or
suspension be entered on the Officer’s disciplinary record, until the Summary
Opinion Arbitrator rules on the merits of the grievance. At least ten (10) days
prior to the Summary Opinion hearing, the Officer, or the Lodge acting on his
or her behalf, may submit a written statement of no more than three (3) pages
in length, setting forth the position of the Officer and the reasons why the
Officer believes the reprimand should be set aside or the suspension should be
set aside or reduced, to which the Department may submit a rebuttal of not
more than two (2) pages. In addition, the Officer, provided he or she previously
submitted the written statement referenced in the preceding paragraph, may
appear in person before the Summary Opinion Arbitrator and make an oral

15
presentation, of no more than fifteen (15) minutes in length, setting forth the
reasons why the suspension should be set aside or reduced. The-Department
representative, in turn, shall have the-option of presenting an oral rebuttal. For
good cause shown, either party may be granted leave by the Summary Opinion
Arbitrator to submit a written rebuttal within ten (10) days.

2. Accept the recommendation.

In the event the Officer does not make an election within ten (10) working days, the
recommendation for suspension will be deemed accepted, absent a written agreement
between the Lodge and the Department to extend the election period.

B. Suspensions from Eleven (11) to Thirty (30) Days

Officers who receive a recommendation for discipline from eleven (11) to thirty (30) days as a
result of a sustained Complaint Register investigation (CR#) shall have one of three options,
the selection of which shall preclude the Officer, or the Lodge acting on his or her behalf,
from selecting any of the other options listed below, except that the Officer is permitted
to accept the recommendation at any time. Within ten (10) working days of receiving the
recommendation for discipline the Officer shall elect one of the following options:

1. The filing of a grievance challenging the recommendation for discipline; or

2. Submission of a grievance to, and in accordance with the provisions of, the
Summary Opinion process set forth in Paragraph A(1) above; or

3. Accept the recommendation.

In the event an Officer does not make an election within ten (10) working days, the
recommendation for suspension will be deemed accepted, absent a written agreement between
the Lodge and the Department to extend the election period.

When an Officer elects to file a grievance, the Lodge will have sixty (60) days from receipt of
the investigative file to inform the Department whether the Lodge will advance the grievance to
arbitration, and if so, whether the grievance will be advanced to arbitration, unless the parties
mutually agree otherwise.

In the event the Lodge decides not to advance the grievance to arbitration, the Officer will have
ten (10) working days to elect review of the recommendation for suspension by the Police
Board as set forth in the Police Board’s Rules of Procedure, Article IV, Section B,
paragraphs 3 through 9 (published November 1, 1975). In the event the Officer elects
review of the recommendation for suspension by the Police Board, the Officer will not be
required to serve the recommended suspension, nor will the suspension be entered on the
Officer’s disciplinary record, until the Police Board rules on the merits of the
recommended suspension.

Arbitration of suspension grievances pursuant to this Paragraph B shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of Appendix Q.

C. Suspensions from Thirty-One (31) to Three Hundred Sixty-Five (365) Days

Officers who receive a recommendation for discipline from thirty-one (31) to three hundred

sixty-five (365) days as a result of a sustained CR# shall have one of three options, the

selection of which shall preclude the Officer, or the Lodge acting on his or her behalf,

from selecting any of the other options listed below, except that the Officer is permitted
16
to accept the recommendation at any time. Within ten (10) working days of receiving the
recommendation for discipline the Officer(s) shall elect one of the following options:

1. A review by the Police Board as set forth in the Police Board's Rules of Procedure, Article
I, ILand III (published November 1, 1975); or

2. The filing of a grievance challenging the recommendation for discipline; or
3. Accept the recommended discipline.

In the event an Officer does not make an election within ten (10) working days, the
recommendation for suspension will be reviewed by the Police Board.

When an Officer files a grievance, the Lodge will have sixty (60) days from the receipt of the
investigative file to inform the Department whether the Lodge will advance the grievance to
arbitration. Arbitration of suspension grievances pursuant to this Paragraph C shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of Appendix Q. The parties will cooperate in
the scheduling of all arbitration hearings.

In the event the Lodge decides not to advance the grievance to arbitration, the Officer will have
ten (10) working days to elect review of the recommendation for suspension by the Police
Board as set forth in paragraphs 9.6.C.1 above. In the event the Officer elects review of the
recommendation for suspension by the Police Board, the Officer will not be required to
serve the recommended suspension, nor will the suspension be entered on the Officer’s
disciplinary record, until the Police Board rules on the merits of the recommended
suspension.

In the event an Officer does not make an election within ten (10) working days, the
recommendation for suspension will be deemed accepted, absent a written agreement
between the Lodge and the Department to extend the election period.

D. When an Officer exercises his or her right to contest a disciplinary recommendation,
whether by filing a grievance or electing review by the Police Board, Complaint Register
files shall be provided to the Lodge promptly upon written request.

Section 9.7 —Authority of the Arbitrator

A. Except as specified in Subsection C below, the Arbitrator shall have no right to amend,
modify, nullify, disregard, add to, or subtract from the provisions of this Agreement. The
Arbitrator shall only consider and make a decision with respect to the specific issue or issues
presented to the Arbitrator and shall have no authority to make a decision on any other issues
not so submitted. The Arbitrator shall submit in writing his or her decision to the Employer
and to the Lodge within thirty (30) days following the close of hearing unless the parties agree
to an extension thereof. The decision shall be based upon the Arbitrator's interpretation of the
meaning or application of the terms of this Agreement to the facts of the grievance presented,
and shall be final and binding upon the parties.

 
 
 

B. In the case of a sustained finding that is subject to the parties’ grievance procedure, the
Arbitrator has the authority to review whether IPRA or IAD made a good faith effort to secure
an affidavit from the complainant and whether the affidavit of the head of IPRA or IAD was
based upon objective evidence of the type specified in Appendix L, in addition to the issues of
just cause and the appropriateness of the penalty in determining whether to grant the grievance.

C. Any Officer who is a member of and adheres to the established and _ traditional
tenets or teachings of a bona fide religion, body or sect which has historically held
conscientious objections to financially supporting organizations such as the Lodge, upon proof

17
thereof, may be excused from the obligations set forth in Section 3.1 Article 3; and the
Arbitrator may require, in lieu of such obligations, the payment by such Officer of a sum equal
to the fair share agency fee to a non-religious charitable fund exempt from taxation under
Section 501(c)(3) of Title 26 chosen by such Officer from a list of at least three such funds to
be submitted by the Lodge. The Employer shall not participate in but shall be bound by such an
arbitration.

If an Officer who holds conscientious objections pursuant to this section requests the Lodge
to use the grievance-arbitration procedure on the Officer's behalf, the Lodge may charge the
Officer the reasonable costs of using the procedure.

Section 9.8 — Expense of the Arbitrator

The fee and expenses of the Arbitrator shall be borne by the party whose position is not sustained
by the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator in the event of a decision not wholly sustaining the position of
either party, shall determine the appropriate allocation of his or her fees and expenses. Each party
shall be responsible for compensating its own representative(s) and witness(es). The cost of a
transcript, where requested by either party, shall be paid by the party so requesting it.

The party requesting a cancellation, rescheduling or other postponement of a set hearing date shall
pay the Arbitrator's cancellation fee.

Section 9.9 — Processing and Time Limits

The resolution of a grievance satisfactory to the Lodge at any step shall be deemed a final
settlement, and any grievance not initiated or taken to the next step within the time limit specified
herein will be considered settled on the basis of the last answer by management. The time limits
specified in this Article may be extended or waived by mutual agreement. Grievances may be
initiated at any appropriate step corresponding with the nature of the grievance and the manner in
which it arose.

Section 9.10 — Normal Operation

Grievance meetings shall be scheduled at reasonable times and in a manner which does not
unreasonably interfere with the Employer's operations. Reasonable duty time shall be allowed the
grievant Officer(s) and the watch representative or unit representative under this Article, for the pre-
arbitral steps under Section 9.2.

Section 9.11 — Exhaustion

It is the intent of the parties to this Agreement that the procedures set forth in this Article shall be
mandatory as to any grievance unless expressly and specifically excluded by the terms of this
Agreement.

Section 9.12 — Lodge Rights

This Agreement does not create or convey to any member of the bargaining unit a right to
determine whether any grievance shall be advanced to arbitration. The right to evaluate any
grievance and determine whether that grievance is withdrawn, settled or advanced to any
form of arbitration remains solely the right of the Lodge. In the event the Lodge determines it
will not advance any grievance(s) to arbitration, the Officer(s) who filed the grievance(s) will
be afforded the existing procedures for the review and/or challenge of reprimands or
recommendations of discipline, to the extent provided for herein.

18
ARTICLE 10 — NON-DISCRIMINATION
Section 10.1 — Equal Employment Opportunity

The Employer will continue to provide equal employment opportunity for all Officers, and develop
and apply equal employment practices.

Section 10.2 — Non-Discrimination

In the application of the terms and conditions of this Agreement, the Employer shall not
discriminate against Officers, and employment-related decisions will be based on qualifications
and predicted performance in a given position without regard to race, color, sex, religion, age
(40-63), sexual orientation or national origin of the Officer nor shall the Employer discriminate
against Officers as a result of membership in the Lodge. Nothing contained in this Agreement
shall be deemed to preclude the mandatory retirement of any Officer upon or after the attainment
of age 63. Officers shall not be transferred, assigned or reassigned for reasons prohibited by this
Section 10.2.

Section 10.3 — Political Activity or Campaigning
The Employer shall not prohibit an Officer from, or discriminate against, his or her engaging in
political activities or campaigning while off duty, provided that the Officer does not:

A. wear a uniform or any part thereof which would identify the individual as a police officer, or
use property (including documents or records) of the Chicago Police Department:

B. display or otherwise lead others to believe he or she is carrying a badge, baton or gun;

C. hold himself/herself out as a police officer, except that a truthful response to a legitimate
question shall not be a violation of this section;

D. engage in such activities in a District(s) where he or she is assigned unless the Officer lives in
the District except that the Employer shall not transfer an Officer into a District for the
purpose of preventing him from engaging in such activities.

An Officer who runs for political office may, but need not, take a leave of absence; provided that if

the Officer does not choose to take a leave of absence, he or she shall first fully exhaust all

accumulated paid time off and any time off thereafter shall be subject to meeting the operational
needs of the Chicago Police Department.

Section 10.4 — Religious Holiday Accommodation

The obligation to accommodate the religious beliefs of Officers covered by the Agreement is
fulfilled if those Officers whose religious beliefs require that they not work but who are
scheduled to work on a recognized religious holiday are permitted at the Officer's option one of
the following choices in order to be excused from their regular tour of duty: (a) the use of a
personal day; (b) the use of compensatory time; (c) voluntary change of regular day off (as
permitted in Section 20.3 of the Agreement); or (d) excused from duty non-disciplinary (Code
89). This option may be applied for certain recognized religious holidays of faiths whose tenets
require abstinence from work subject to the determination of the Commanding Officer that this
accommodation does not unduly interfere with operational needs.

Section 10.5 —Americans with Disabilities Act

In the event the Employer shall be required to make reasonable accommodation under the
Americans with Disabilities Act to the disability of an applicant or incumbent Officer that may

19
be in conflict with the right of an Officer under this Agreement, the Employer shall bring this
matter to the attention of the Lodge. In the event the parties cannot reach an agreement on such
accommodation, the provisions of Article 9 shall be available and the Arbitrator shall consider
the Employer's and the Lodge's (if any exists) obligations under the Americans with Disabilities
Act and this Agreement, provided that no Officer shall be displaced by such decision.

ARTICLE 11— HOLIDAYS

Section 11.1 — Designated Holiday
The Employer agrees that the following days shall be considered holidays:

New Year’s Day

M. L. King, Jr.’s Birthday
Lincoln’s Birthday
Washington’s Birthday
Pulaski Day

Police Memorial Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day

Labor Day

Columbus Day

Veteran’s Day

1 January

3" Monday in Jan.

12 February

3" Monday in Feb.

1“ Monday in Mar.
Last Saturday in April
Last Monday in May

4 July

1“ Monday in Sept.

2™ Monday in Oct.

11 November

th

Thanksgiving Day 4° Thursday in November

Christmas Day 25 December

Section 11.2 — Compensation for Holidays
Compensation for the holidays listed in Section 11.1 is granted as follows:

A. Employees who are required to work a regular tour of duty (eight hours) on a holiday will be
credited with eight (8) hours of compensatory time and four (4) hours of compensatory time or
additional pay, as the Officer elects.

B. Employees whose regular day-off coincides with an established holiday will be credited with
eight (8) hours of compensatory time.

C. Employees whose regular day off coincides with an established holiday, and who are required
to work a regular tour of duty (eight hours) on that holiday, will be credited with twenty (20)
hours of compensatory time and four (4) hours of compensatory time or additional pay, as the
Officer elects.

20
In the event that an Officer covered by this Agreement is required to attend court on his or her
regular day off and that day is also a holiday, the Officer will be compensated at the rate of
double-time for the minimum set forth in 20.5 or double-time for the actual hours worked,
whichever is greater, plus eight (8) hours of compensatory time or additional pay, as the
Officer elects.

D. All hours in excess of a regular tour of duty on a holiday will be compensated in accordance
with the provisions of Article 20, Hours and Overtime.

E. Compensatory time will not be credited to an employee on a holiday if he or she is on the
medical roll (excluding I.0.D.), absent due to sickness, or death in family, on military leave,
suspended, excused non-disciplinary, or on a leave of absence.

Section 11.3 — Personal Day

For each calendar year, Officers shall be entitled to receive, in addition to the days specified in
Section 11.1, four (4) personal days. Officers shall not be required to work on a personal day
provided that written notice of the personal day is given to the appropriate supervisor no later than
ten (10) days prior to the personal day and that the granting of the personal day does not adversely
affect Department operations. A holiday specified in Section 11.1 may not be selected as a personal
day. Officers covered by this Agreement may elect to be paid for all unused personal days each
year in lieu of taking the time off. Where Officers elect such payment, the payment shall be made
by April 1 of the following year. Officers may carry over up to four (4) unused personal days for
use in the following year. Any dispute within a unit as to the selection of a personal day shall be
resolved by x as defined in Section 23.5.

Section 11.4 — Special Compensation Time

If, as a result of a declaration by the Mayor, all employees of the City of Chicago except for police
and fire department employees are given a day off or portion thereof with pay, then all Officers who
are required to work during such excused time shall be given compensatory time off at straight time
rate equivalent to the hours worked during such excused time.

Section 11.5 — Holiday Declaration

To the extent that any additional holiday is declared by federal, state or municipal authority during
the term of this Agreement, and such holiday is granted to any employee of the Employer, then said
holiday shall be added and incorporated into Section 11.1 above and compensated for as provided in
Section 11.2 above.

ARTICLE 12 — PROMOTIONS

For positions within the bargaining unit for which there is an appointment, selection and promotion
process, the Employer will provide the Lodge with copies of any department level directives
announcing an appointment and selection process, if any are issued, prior to the time the process is
initiated. The Employer will provide the Lodge with the names of Officers appointed to those
positions. At the Lodge's request, the Employer will provide the Lodge with material regarding the
selection and appointment process.

For BIS D-2A examinations which include a written qualifying test, each applicant who takes
the written qualifying test shall be given a copy of his or her answer sheet prior to the departure
from the test site. Applicants will be allowed to review a copy of the written qualifying test and
to challenge items on that test, in writing, during an announced challenge period.

21
After the BIS D-2A selection process is complete and the promotional list has been finalized, the
City shall provide the Lodge with a copy of the list, a copy of the written qualifying test and the
correct answer key.

The Employer will announce BIS D-2A examinations sixty (60) days before the examination is
administered, whenever possible.

ARTICLE 13 — LAYOFFS — RE-EMPLOYMENT
Section 13.1 — Notice of Layoffs

When there is an impending layoff with respect to any Officers in the bargaining unit, the Employer
shall inform the Lodge in writing no later than thirty (30) days prior to such layoff. The Employer
will provide the Lodge the names of all Officers to be laid off prior to the layoff. Probationary
officers shall be laid off first, then Officers shall be laid off in accordance with their seniority.
The Officers with the least amount of seniority in the Police Department shall be laid off first,
unless special qualifications dictate retention. All Officers shall receive notice in writing of the
layoff at least thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date of such layoffs.

Section 13.2 — Hiring During Layoffs

No employees may be hired to perform or permitted to perform those duties normally performed
by an Officer while any Officer is in layoff status. In the event special qualifications requiring
expert skills of a technical or professional nature are unavailable in the bargaining unit, but
essential to the operation of the Department, the parties shall meet to resolve such issue. If a
mutual resolution is not reached, the Employer may invoke the grievance procedure.

Section 13.3 — Recall

Any Officer who has been laid off shall be placed on the appropriate reinstatement list and shall be
recalled on the basis of seniority in the Police Department, as provided in this Agreement prior to
any new officers being hired.

ARTICLE 14 — BULLETIN BOARDS

The Employer shall provide the Lodge with designated space on available bulletin boards, or
provide bulletin boards on a reasonable basis, where none are available, upon which the Lodge may
post its notices.

ARTICLE 15 — SAFETY ISSUES
Section 15.1 — Cooperation

The Employer and the Lodge agree to cooperate to the fullest extent reasonably possible to promote
the use of safe equipment and facilities.

Section 15.2 — Safety Committee

Up to a maximum of five (5) Officers designated by the Lodge and five (5) persons designated by
the Employer shall comprise a Safety Committee for the purpose of discussing and investigating
safety and health issues relating to Officers and to recommend reasonable safety and health criteria
relating to equipment and facilities. The Committee shall meet at least once each calendar quarter or
more frequently by mutual agreement. Formal recommendations of the Committee shall be
submitted in writing to the Superintendent of Police with a copy to the Lodge, but such
recommendations shall not be binding upon the Employer or the Lodge. In addition to Committee
recommendations, the Lodge may submit additional written recommendations to the

22
Superintendent.

For purposes of this section, the term "investigating" shall be limited to the right of the Lodge
Committee members to obtain information upon request and observe conditions regarding
identified safety and health hazards and to discuss such matters with Officers and members of
management provided such discussions do not unduly interfere with the performance of duty by
any Officer or Committee member.

 

In the event the Employer agrees in writing to adopt the recommendation of the Committee or the
Lodge, the recommendation shall be implemented within a reasonable period of time, unless the
failure to implement in a timely fashion was beyond the reasonable control of the Employer.
However, no monetary relief shall result from the failure to implement any such recommendation.

If the Superintendent disagrees with the recommendation of the Committee or the Lodge, he or she
shall so notify the Committee or the Lodge in writing. Within ten (10) calendar days of such notice,
the Lodge may request arbitration of any such dispute if such dispute raises a good faith issue
regarding the use of equipment or materials which are alleged to present a serious risk to the health or
safety of an Officer beyond that which is inherent in the normal performance of police duties. The
decision of the Arbitrator under this section shall be advisory only and shall not be binding upon the
Employer; provided that this procedure shall not be exclusive and shall not affect the right of an
Officer or the Lodge to invoke Article 9, where otherwise appropriate. No such advisory opinion shall
constitute a determination of the existence of any safety or health hazard under this Agreement, nor
shall any such advisory opinion be introduced in any proceeding under Article 9 of this Agreement.

Section 15.3 — Disabling Defects

No employee shall be required to use any equipment that has been designated by both the Lodge
and the Employer as being defective because of a disabling condition unless the disabling condition
has been corrected. When an assigned department vehicle is found to have a disabling defect or is in
violation of the law, the police Officer will notify his or her supervisor, complete required reports,
and follow the supervisor's direction relative to requesting repair, replacement or the continued
operation of said vehicle.

Section 15.4 — Notice

The Employer shall post in conspicuous places where notices to Officers are customarily posted, all
safety and health notices required by law.

ARTICLE 16 — SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT AND SPECIAL EMPLOYMENT

 

Section 16.1 — Secondary Employment

The Employer reserves the right to restrict secondary employment when it has reasonable cause to
believe that the number of hours which the Officer spends on secondary employment is adversely
affecting his or her performance as a police officer. The Employer retains the existing right to limit,
restrict or prohibit the nature or type of secondary employment that an Officer undertakes.

Section 16.2 — Special Employment

A. The special employment program is a voluntary program that allows non-probationary full-duty
Officers to work on their days off for the Chicago Housing Authority, the Chicago Transit
Authority, Chicago Midway Airport or Chicago O'Hare International Airport, subject to the
terms and conditions set forth below.

B. An Officer's eligibility for special employment is governed by the following terms and
conditions:
23
1. An Officer is not eligible to work any special employment assignment
under the following circumstances:

a. The Officer's most recent overall performance rating was "requires
improvement" or "unacceptable."

b. The Officer is serving a suspension or has been relieved from regular duty as
a result of Summary Punishment.

c. The Officer is on the medical roll or has been released from the medical roll
for furlough.

d. During the thirty-(30-) day period prior to the date of the Officer's

application, the Officer was absent from duty for five (5) or more days as a result
of a non-duty-related injury or illness.

e. The Officer's disciplinary record contains three (3) or more Summary
Punishment actions within the prior twelve-(12-) month period.

f. The Officer has been disqualified from participating in the program
based on his or her performance while working a special employment or
Department-procured outside employment assignment.

2. An Officer will be suspended from working a special employment assignment for
a period of thirty (30) calendar days if the Officer was scheduled for a special
employment assignment and failed to work such assignment without reasonable
cause for such absence acceptable to the Employer (e.g., a death in the family, an
injury on duty or a change in the Officer's regular duty schedule).

3. An Officer will be suspended from working a special employment assignment for a period
of ninety (90) calendar days if the Officer was scheduled for a special employment
assignment and failed to work such assignment without advance notice to the Employer of
his or her absence (i.e., a "no call/no show").

If an Officer believes that he or she has been wrongfully declared ineligible to work
special employment, the Officer shall submit a "To-From-Subject Report" to the
coordinator of the special employment program no later than four (4) calendar days
following his or her receipt of notification of ineligibility. If the program coordinator's
response is unsatisfactory to the Officer, then the Officer may initiate a grievance at Step
One of the grievance procedure set forth in Section 9.2 no later than seven (7) of the
Officer's working days following his or her receipt of such response.

 

The Employer shall assign special employment opportunities to eligible Officers based on
seniority.

The Employer shall publish any limitations it establishes on the number of hours,
tours or assignments that may be worked by Officers in the program.

The exclusive remedy for any incorrect assignment of special employment shall be the
assignment of future special employment opportunities in a manner that corrects the error in
assignment (e.g., the opportunity to work an additional special employment assignment) or the
grant of four (4) hours of compensation or compensatory time off at the Officer's election.

ARTICLE 17 — LODGE REPRESENTATIVES

For the purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this Agreement, the Employer

24
agrees as follows:

Section 17.1 — Meeting Participation and Scheduling.

The Employer recognizes and agrees to meet with Lodge representatives, including Watch and Unit
representatives relating to matters covered by this Agreement. Meetings shall occur at reasonable
times by mutual agreement. The names of designated representatives shall be certified to the
Employer in writing by the Lodge.

  

Section 17.2 — Leave from Duty

In addition to the Lodge President, six (6) Officers covered by this Agreement shall, upon written
request, be granted leave from their duties for the Employer for the purpose of performing full
time duties for the Lodge. During such a leave, the Employer will continue to pay said Officers
all salary and maintain all benefits, including pension contributions and seniority accruals, as if
the Officers were on full duty with the Employer, provided that, effective July 1, 2001, the Lodge
reimburses the Employer an amount equal to the salary and benefits and provided that the
Employer shall remain responsible for its portion of the pension contribution. The duration of
such a leave shall not exceed three (3) years, but shall be renewable in the same duration. Such
leaves may be revoked only by written notice to the Employer from the President of the Lodge.
Up to two (2) additional Officers covered by this Agreement who shall be elected to a State
Lodge and/or the National Office of the Fraternal Order of Police shall, upon written request, be
granted leave from duties for the Employer under the same terms and conditions previously set
out in this Section.

Section 17.3 —Attendance at Lodge Meetings

Subject to the need for orderly scheduling and emergencies, the Employer agrees that elected
officials and members of the Board of Directors of the Lodge shall be permitted reasonable time off,
without loss of pay, to attend general, board or special meetings of the Lodge, provided that at least
forty-eight (48) hours’ notice of such meetings shall be given in writing to the Employer, and
provided further that the names of all such officials and Officers shall be certified in writing to the
Employer. Unit representatives shall also be included within the provisions of the preceding
sentence, provided that such time off for such Unit representatives shall be without pay, unless the
Unit representative has compensatory time available and elects to use it.

 

Section 17.4 — Grievance Processing

Reasonable time while on duty shall be permitted Lodge representatives for the purpose of aiding or
assisting or otherwise representing Officers in the handling and processing of grievances or
exercising other rights set forth in this Agreement, and such reasonable time shall be without loss of
pay.

Section 17.5 —Attendance at State and National Conferences

A. Subject to staffing needs, a reasonable number of appointed or elected delegates will be
permitted to attend state and national conferences of the Lodge. Such conference time shall
be equal to the duration of the conference plus reasonable travel time to and from such
conference.

B. A maximum of twenty-two (22) members of the Lodge Board of Directors will be permitted to
attend state and national conventions of the Lodge with pay. Such convention time shall be
equal to the duration of the convention plus reasonable travel time to and from such
convention, up to a maximum of seven (7) days every two (2) years.

25
Section 17.6 — Lodge Negotiating Team

Members designated as being on the Lodge negotiating team who are scheduled to work on a day
on which negotiations will occur, shall, for the purpose of attending scheduled negotiations, be
excused from their regular duties without loss of pay. If a designated Lodge negotiating team
member is in regular day-off status on the day of negotiations, he or she will not be compensated for
attending the session.

 

Section 17.7 — Lodge Activity

The Employer shall not prohibit discussion, solicitation, or distribution of literature, among
Officers covered by this Agreement with respect to matters concerning Lodge affairs, unless
such activity interferes with the performance of the duties of any employee or with the orderly
and efficient operations of the Employer, or unless it interferes with the transaction of business
by the public with the City government.

ARTICLE 18 — DISABILITY INCOME
Section 18.1 — L0.D

Any Officer absent from work on account of injury on duty (I.0.D.) for any period of time not
exceeding twelve (12) months shall receive for each such I.0.D. full pay and benefits for the period
of absence, provided such injury or illness is certified by the Medical Services Section. Such
certification shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Officers who have exhausted said twelve (12) month paid L.O.D. leave shall be given the option to
voluntarily go on non-paid medical leave instead of disability pension, provided:

A. The Officer must exhaust all furlough, personal days, baby furlough days, and accumulated
compensatory time;

B. Such non-paid leave shall continue for no more than three months, plus an extension of no
more than three months, and shall not be granted or extended unless the Employer determines
that the Officer is likely to return to duty within the period of the leave or extension thereof;
and

C. Such non-paid leave shall be subject to Section 23.1.B herein below, and shall not be deemed
duty disability leave.
Section 18.2 — Non-I.0.D

Any Officer absent from work on account of non-[.O.D. injury or illness for any period of time not
exceeding twelve (12) months in any twenty-four (24) consecutive month period, shall receive full
pay and benefits for the period of absence, provided such injury or illness is certified by the Medical
Services Section. Such certification shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Section 18.3 — Limited Duty I.O.D

Officers injured in the line of duty, who are certified by the Medical Services Section as being
able to perform limited duty assignments, shall be given limited duty assignments until they can
perform regular duty assignments, or until they are mandatorily retired, whichever occurs first.

Section 18.4 — Recognized Openings

Any Officer who is certified by the Medical Services Section as being able to perform a limited
duty assignment may be placed by the Employer in a recognized opening, as defined in Section
23.9, notwithstanding anything in Section 23.9 to the contrary.

26
Section 18.5 — Certification
Certification that an Officer has been injured in the line of duty shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Section 18.6 — Return to Duty

In order to enable Officers applying to return from leave for injury or illness to be processed back to
duty as soon as possible, the Employer shall advise such Officers in advance of the records needed
and other requirements they must meet in order to permit such return. The Employer must consider
medical records and reports from legally-qualified practitioners of the healing arts acting within the
scope of his or her license, including, but not limited to, chiropractors, in its determination of
whether an Officer is fit to return to duty.

If the Employer requires and specifies certain additional medical tests to be performed and passed
as a condition of the Officer's return and said tests were not, and are not normally, performed in the
normal course of appropriate medical treatment for the illness or injury involved, then the Employer
shall, at its option, either provide the test, or reimburse the Officer for the cost of both the test and
any required record thereof to the extent that such cost is not covered by insurance.

The Employer shall not require a physician's certificate as a condition of return to duty from
medical leave lasting three days or less, except for good cause.

Section 18.7 —Advisory Committee

The Employer and the Lodge shall establish a joint Committee to develop solutions to problems
of medical leave cost and abuse. The Committee shall be advisory only.

Section 18.8 — Injuries on Duty and Recurrence Claims

The Employer and the Lodge have agreed upon procedures which will be followed by the Medical
Services Section when an Officer reports an injury on duty or a recurrence of an injury on duty.
Those procedures are set forth in Appendix N of this Agreement.

Section 18.9 — Employer Responsibility for Hospital, Medical and Prescription
Costs and Pension Contributions

Pending the final determination of benefits by the Policemen’s Annuity and Benefit Fund,
Officers covered by this Agreement who apply for duty, ordinary or occupational disability benefits
will be required to contribute the same amount as active Officers for health care benefits; and the
Employer will continue to provide the same health care benefits.

Officers who receive duty or occupational disability benefits will continue to receive those benefits
at no cost without any refund of their previous contributions. Officers who are awarded ordinary
disability benefits will be required to contribute at the Public Health Services Act (PHSA) rate
reduced by the administrative fee of 2%, as of the first day of the month following the Fund's final
determination of the Officer's claim.

The Employer agrees to pay all hospital, medical and prescription costs of an Officer who is on a
leave of absence for duty or occupational disability purposes, all at no cost to the employee. The
Employer shall make pension contributions on behalf of the employee as if the employee had
remained in active service.

Section 18.10 — Medical Benefit Statement

Upon the written request of an Officer who is injured or becomes ill in the performance of his or her
duties, the Employer will provide a written statement showing the period of absence and the amount

27
of salary received during the period of absence due to such injury or illness. Upon the written request
of an Officer on a leave of absence for ordinary, occupational or duty disability pension, the
Employer will provide a statement covering the period of absence prior to retirement and the amount
of the disability benefit received by the Officer during said period.

Any statements for any calendar year required of the Employer under this Section will be provided
only once.

ARTICLE 19 — BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Section 19.1 — Death in Family

The Employer agrees to provide to Officers leave without loss of pay, not to exceed three (3)
consecutive days any time within the seven (7) calendar days immediately following the death of a
member of the immediate family, except for the death of a brother-in-law or sister-in-law which
shall be for the day of the funeral only.

Annual and time-due furlough will not be extended as a result of death occurring in the Officer's
immediate family during such furlough unless the death occurs during the last three (3) days of the
furlough period, at which time the procedure outlined above will be followed.

Section 19.2 — Definition of Family

A member of the immediate family shall be defined to be any Officer's mother or father (including
step), spouse, domestic partner, daughter or son (including step or adopted), sister or brother
(including half or step), father-in-law, mother-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, sister-in-law,
brother-in-law, grandparent or grandchild.

In the event of the death of a domestic partner, the employee shall be granted three (3) consecutive
days of leave any time within seven (7) calendar days immediately following the death provided
that the employee has registered the name of the employee's domestic partner with the Department
of Personnel.

Domestic partners are defined as two persons, regardless of their gender, who have a close personal
relationship, sharing the same regular and permanent residence for at least six months, are eighteen
years of age or older, not married to anyone, not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in
the State of Illinois, and are each other's sole domestic partner, responsible for each other's common
welfare and jointly sharing their financial responsibilities.

Section 19.3 — Extended Bereavement Leave

Where an Officer is entitled to bereavement leave pursuant to Section 19.1 above, and where death
occurs and the funeral is to be held out of Illinois and beyond the states contiguous thereto, the
Officer shall be entitled to a maximum of five consecutive days. For purposes of this Section, those
states contiguous to the State of Illinois are: Missouri, Iowa, Wisconsin, Indiana, Kentucky and
Michigan.

ARTICLE 20 — HOURS AND OVERTIME

Section 20.1 — Work Day and Work Week.

All time in excess of the hours worked in the Officer’s normal work day and the normal work week
shall be compensated as provided in Section 20.2.

Section 20.2 — Compensation for Overtime

All approved overtime in excess of the hours required of an Officer by reason of the Officer's

28
regular duty, whether of an emergency nature or of a non-emergency nature, shall be compensated
for at the rate of time-and-one-half. Such time shall be computed on the basis of completed fifteen
(15)-minute segments.

An Officer who earns overtime pursuant to the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) shall be
paid overtime compensation at the FLSA rate agreed upon by the parties. An Officer who earns
non-FLSA overtime shall have the option of electing pay or compensatory time consistent with the
provisions of this Agreement.

Section 20.3 — Sixth and Seventh Day Work

An Officer who is in pay status for six (6) or seven (7) consecutive days within the pay period
Sunday through Saturday will be compensated at the rate of time-and-one-half for work performed
on the sixth (6th) day and seventh (7th) day. An Officer who performs work on a regular day off
which has been cancelled, will receive a minimum of eight (8) hours compensation or compensation
at the rate of time-and-one-half times the actual hours worked, whichever is greater. Voluntary
schedule changes will be exempt from this provision.

Section 20.4 — Call-Back

A call-back is defined as an official assignment of work which does not continuously precede or
continuously follow an Officer's regularly-scheduled working hours. Officers who are directed to
report to any of the Employer's premises or other specified location or are authorized to attend a beat
meeting at a specified time on a regular scheduled work day or required to report to the Medical
Section or are authorized to attend a beat meeting at a specified time on the Officer's regular day off,
shall be compensated for two (2) hours at the appropriate overtime rate or be compensated for the
actual time worked, whichever is greater, at the overtime rate.

Section 20.5 — Court Time

Officers required to attend court outside their regularly scheduled work hours shall be compensated
at the overtime rate with a minimum of two (2) hours, except (1) if the court time is during the
Officer's compensatory time and the Officer knew of the court date before his or her request for
compensatory time was approved, (2) while the Officer is on paid medical leave, or (3) if the
Officer is compensated for such time by a secondary employer.

Officers required to attend authorized court or authorized pretrial conferences within one (1) hour
immediately preceding their normal tour of duty will be compensated at the overtime rate for one
(1) hour. Officers required to attend authorized court or authorized pretrial conferences
commencing during their tour of duty and extending beyond the normal end of the tour of duty
will be compensated at the overtime rate on the basis of completed fifteen (15)-minute segments.
This overtime will be computed from the end of the normal tour of duty to the sign-out time at
court or at conclusion of the pretrial conference.

Court appearances during off-duty hours will be credited at the rate of time-and-one-half with a
minimum of two (2) hours when the actual time spent in court is two (2) hours or less. When the
actual time spent in court exceeds two (2) hours, overtime will be computed on the basis of
completed fifteen (15)-minute segments. Appearances at more than one court on the same day will
be computed at the rate of time-and-one-half in the following manner:

A. When the time between court appearances exceeds two (2) hours (sign-out time from the first
court to sign-in time at the next court), a minimum of two (2) hours will be credited for each
court appearance.

29
B. When the time between court appearances is two (2) hours or less, overtime will be computed
on the basis of completed fifteen (15)-minute segments for the total time between sign-in at
first court and sign-out time at the last court.

A minimum of two (2) hours will be credited when this total time is two (2) hours or less.

Section 20.6 — Tour of Duty Exchange

Eligible Officers may participate in the tour of duty exchange program. Any disputes arising out of
this program shall be resolved through the expedited dispute resolution procedure applicable to this
program.

Section 20.7 — Change of Schedule.

The Employer's right to assign Officers for duty at any time and at different times during each
twenty-eight (28)-day police period remains unrestricted and unchallenged. Watch assignments and
designated starting times shall be established and posted for each police period. Watch assignments
and designated starting times shall remain in effect for the duration of the twenty-eight (28)-day
police period, except for:

A. in-service training (including individualized training) with a maximum of six
(6) programs per year for a maximum of eighteen (18) days per year and with seven (7) days'
notice to the Officer; or

B. _ elective training (elective training are job-related programs the Department makes available to
Officers and in which the Officer elects to participate); or

C. mandatory proficiency training for employees receiving D-2 or D-2A pay or otherwise
receiving specialist or premium pay because of the position or assignment held, with a maximum
of six (6) programs per year, for a maximum of thirty (30) days per year and with seven (7) days’
notice to the Officer; or

D. pre-service training for promotions; or
E. court appearances in excess of two (2) consecutive days; or
F. initial assignment when detailed to the Alternate Response Section.

However, starting times may be adjusted by the Employer: (1) plus or minus two (2) hours from the
designated starting times; or (2) for up to seven (7) hours within an Officer's assigned watch for
circumstances not known to the Department 48 hours prior to the start of the police period. Provided
that where an Officer who has been scheduled to attend in-service training and does not attend
because of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the Employer, the Employer may
reschedule said Officer for said in-service training without payment of premium time hereunder.

Any adjustment inconsistent with the above provision, made after the start of the twenty-eight (28)-day
police period, will result in payment in accordance with Section 20.2 for the hours worked outside of
the Officer's tour of duty scheduled at the beginning of the Officer's twenty-eight (28)-day police
period for that period. Shift changes during a police period made voluntarily at the request of an Officer
and upon approval of the Employer shall not require additional compensation.

This Section does not apply in the following situations:

A. The Superintendent and the Mayor have determined in writing that a serious emergency
condition exists;

B. When Officers are assigned to duties that by their very nature require changes in starting
times, including personnel assigned to the following Offices, Bureaus, Divisions or Units:

30
Office of the Superintendent (Administration, Office of Legal Affairs, Management and
Labor Affairs Section, News Affairs, CAPS Implementation Office, CAPS Project Office,
Special Events and Liaison Section, Preventive Programs and Neighborhood Relations);

Office of the Assistant Superintendent (Administration and Detached Services Unit);

Bureau of Professional Standards (Administration, Inspections Division, Internal Affairs
Division, Education and Training Division, Office of Management Accountability);

Bureau of Patrol (Administration, First and Eighteenth District Foot Patrol Units,
District Tactical and Gang Teams, Community Policing Office, Detail Unit,
Troubled Building Section and Area Deputy Chief Office);

Bureau of Strategic Deployment (Administration, Mounted Patrol Unit, Special Functions
Section, Marine and Helicopter Unit);

Bureau of Administrative Services (Administration, Personnel Investigators in
Human Resources Division, Information Services Division, Finance Division and
Reproduction and Graphic Arts Division);

Bureau of Investigative Services [Administration, Organized Crime Division,
Counterterrorism and Intelligence Division (Excluding Bomb and Arson, Public
Transportation and Airport Law Enforcement Sections), Special Investigations Unit,
Central Investigations Unit and Detective Division Mission Teams];

Officers assigned to dignitary protection as part of their regular duties, including
temporary replacements; and

No more than two (2) members of the immediate staff of each exempt Commanding
Officer.

Section 20.8 — Stand-By

Where the Employer requires an Officer to remain on standby, available for work, and the Officer
is not able to come and go as he or she pleases, such time shall be paid as time worked.

Section 20.9 — Day-Off Change

Days off assigned on "change day" shall remain unchanged for the duration of each 28-day police
period except for:

A.

D.

in-service training (including individualized training) with a maximum of seven (7) programs
per year for a maximum of twenty-eight (28) days per year and with seven (7) days' notice to
the Officer; or

elective training (elective training are job-related programs the Department makes available to
Officers and in which the Officer elects to participate); or

mandatory proficiency training for employees receiving D-2 or D-2A pay or otherwise
receiving specialist or premium pay because of the position or assignment held, with a
maximum of twelve (12) programs per year, for a maximum of thirty (30) days per year and
with seven (7) days' notice to the Officer; or

pre-service training for promotions.

The Employer's right to assign Officers for duty while on regular day-off status is unrestricted and
unchallenged. The Employer agrees, however, that in each such event it will pay the Officer so
assigned the optional premium time under Article 20 of the Agreement. No such optional premium

31
time shall be paid, however, for Officers assigned to School Patrol Unit for any change occurring
during any police period which includes the start of the school year, or the end of the school year
nor shall any such optional premium time be paid for in-service training program, with a maximum
of three programs per year, for a maximum of nine days per year, provided the Officer is given
seven (7) days' notice of such change, and pre-service training for promotion, provided, that where
an Officer who has been scheduled to attend in-service training does not attend for any reason
beyond the reasonable control of the Employer, the Employer may reschedule said Officer for said
in-service training without payment of premium time hereunder.

Day off changes made voluntarily at the request of an Officer, and upon approval of the Employer,
shall not require premium pay pursuant to Section 20.3. Changes required to implement the
provisions of Section 23.2 controlling scheduled days off for members of the bargaining unit going
on or returning from furlough, also shall not require premium compensation.

The Lodge acknowledges that willingness to restrict summer furlough and days off on Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays and accept varied days off each week are conditions of assignment among
Mounted Patrol Unit Officers covered by the collective bargaining agreement.

The mounted unit is a recognized exception to this Section, and a change of regular day-off status
for personnel assigned to the mounted unit may be made on a day other than "change day" without
payment of premium time under Article 20 of the Agreement, provided that affected personnel shall
receive at least ten (10) days' notice of such change.

Those Officers assigned to events known as the Taste of Chicago, Mexican Independence Festival
and Puerto Rican Independence Festival shall not have their day-off group changed for the purpose
of avoiding the payment of overtime pay. In the event that days off must be canceled to supplement
the personnel assigned to said events, the opportunity to earn overtime pay will first be offered to
the Officers assigned to said events. If there are not sufficient volunteers, said overtime pay
opportunities will be offered to Officers who are in regular day-off status in the District where the
event occurs. In the event the City permits an event known as Octoberfest, said event shall be added
to the three above listed events.

Section 20.10 — Day-Off Group Assignment

In the event the Employer determines to change an Officer's day-off group assignment, the
Employer shall seek volunteers to satisfy its needs; provided, however, (1) if there are more
volunteers than required, the volunteers with the greatest seniority on the watch in the day-off group
affected shall be changed, and (2) if there are not sufficient volunteers, the Officers with the lowest
seniority on the watch in the day-off group affected shall be changed; provided further, said
Officers meet the Employer's needs.

Section 20.11 — Accumulation of Compensatory Time

The Employer will not restrict an accumulation of compensatory time except as provided in Section
20.2. The number of hours of compensatory time which an Officer has on record shall not be the
controlling factor in determining whether an Officer will be allowed to take time due.

Section 20.12 — Back to Back Shifts on Change Day

An Officer shall normally not be required to work more than four hours on the first watch on
change day if he or she has worked a full tour of duty on the third watch on the proceeding day. If
he or she is required to work more than four hours on a change day on the first watch, he or she
shall be paid at the rate of time-and-one-half for the hours worked on the first watch on change day.

32
Section 20.13 — Duty Availability Allowance

A. Effective on each of the following effective dates, all Officers shall be paid the
following quarterly amounts:

Effective Date Per Quarter
January 1, 2012 $805.00
January 1, 2014 $855.00
January 1, 2016 $870.00
January 1, 2017 $900.00

B. In accord with applicable law, the Employer shall treat duty availability allowance payments
as pensionable.

C. Entitlement to duty availability pay is not dependent on an Officer being present for duty for
an entire pay period.

D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in (A) above, Officers hired on or after
January 1, 2015, shall receive duty availability pay commencing at Step 5 (after 42
months) of the Salary Schedule.

ARTICLE 21— UNIFORMS

Section 21.1 — Uniforms and Equipment Advisory Committee

The Lodge shall establish a three (3) member Uniforms and Equipment Advisory Committee. The
Committee's function will be to offer recommendations relative to additions or deletions in the
Departments Uniforms and Personal Equipment Program. The recommendations will be channeled
through the Research and Development Division to the Department's Uniforms and Personal
Equipment Policy Committee. Any and all recommendations made by the Uniform and Equipment
Advisory Committee will be advisory only.

Section 21.2 — Major Change

The Department will apprise the Uniform and Equipment Advisory Committee of the Lodge
whenever major changes to the Uniform and Personal Equipment Program are anticipated.

Section 21.3 — Uniform Allowance

Each Officer shall receive a uniform allowance of $1,800.00 per year, payable in three (3)
installments of $600.00 on February 1, August 1, and December 1.

Section 21.4 — Uniform Change or Modification

The Employer shall pay for the first issue of any change in, or modification of, the prescribed
uniform announced and effective after November 15, 1981.

Section 21.5 — Uniform Option

Subject to seasonal uniform requirements, the prescribed dress uniform may be worn at any time
at the Officer's option. The current optional winter leather jacket is reclassified as an alternative
to the prescribed long cloth coat, but an Officer shall not be required to own both. When
performing administrative/clerical duties inside a facility, the prescribed uniform short sleeved

33
shirt may be worn irrespective of seasonal uniform requirements.

Section 21.6 — Lost Shields

In cases where discipline is warranted, the maximum suspension for the first offense of loss of
shield shall be one-half day to be implemented by reducing the Officer's compensatory time by
four (4) hours or one actual one-half day suspension without pay if the Officer does not have
available compensatory time.

ARTICLE 22 — INDEMNIFICATION

Section 22.1 — Employer Responsibility

The Employer shall be responsible for, hold Officers harmless from and pay for damages or monies
which may be adjudged, assessed, or otherwise levied against any Officer covered by this
Agreement, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 22.4.

Section 22.2 — Legal Representation

Officers shall have legal representation by the Employer in any civil cause of action brought against
an Officer resulting from or arising out of the performance of duties.

Section 22.3 — Cooperation

Officers shall be required to cooperate with the Employer during the course of the investigation,
administration or litigation of any claim arising under this Article.

Section 22.4 — Applicability

The Employer will provide the protections set forth in Sections 22.1 and 22.2 above so long as the
Officer is acting within the scope of his or her employment and where the Officer cooperates, as
defined in Section 22.3, with the City of Chicago in defense of the action or actions or claims.

Section 22.5 — Expedited Arbitration

Grievances alleging a violation of Article 22 may be initiated at Step Four of the grievance
procedure. In arbitrations thereunder, unless the parties agree otherwise, said hearing shall
commence within thirty (30) days of the selection of the Arbitrator, and the Arbitrator shall issue his
or her award in writing within fifteen (15) days following the close of the hearing; the full written
decision of the Arbitrator may be issued within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing.

ARTICLE 23 — SENIORITY
Section 23.1 — Definition and Application

A. Seniority shall be defined as an Officer's continuous length of service from the date of last hire
as a police officer, subject to subsection B below.

The seniority of an Officer retained beyond the eighteen (18) month probationary period shall
date back to the last date of hire as a police Officer and be subject to the deductions provided in
subsection B.

In the event two or more Officers have the same seniority date, the older Officer, as determined
by referring to the Officers' date of birth as recorded on their employment application, shall
receive the higher seniority status.

There shall be only one seniority for Officers covered by this Agreement and that seniority
shall control for the purpose of determining rights, benefits, and other conditions of
employment affected by seniority under this Agreement.

34
B. All absence from the Department's service without pay as a result of leaves for more than thirty
(30) days (other than military, duty, occupational or ordinary disability), suspensions of more
than thirty (30) days and all unexcused absences shall be deducted in computing continuous
length of service for purposes of determining advancement within the salary schedule, amount
of furlough, and seniority for other purposes covered by this Agreement.

C. The seniority of an Officer and the employment relationship shall be terminated in the
following circumstances:

1. Resignation;

2. Separation (discharge);

3. Retirement;

4. Unauthorized absence for four (4) consecutive working days without notice to the
Employer;

5. If laid off, failure to report fit for duty within seven (7) days of delivery of written

notification of recall to the Officer’s last known address which notification shall be
simultaneously provided to the Lodge;

6. Failure to report fit for duty upon termination of an authorized leave of absence; and

7. Laid off for a period of time as set forth in the City of Chicago Personnel Rules
as in effect on December 31, 1983.

Section 23.2 — Furlough Scheduling

An Officer shall select his or her furlough within the unit of assignment, or if detailed for 28 days or
more prior to the date selection begins, within the unit of detail on the basis of seniority among the
Officers on the Officer’s assigned watch. Officers may elect to take their full furlough or split the
furlough to which they are entitled into two equal segments. Both furloughs, if split, shall be
determined in one process and on the basis of seniority. A full furlough will commence on the Ist
day of a police period. A split furlough will commence on either the Ist or 15th day of a police
period.

Compensatory time furloughs will not be scheduled for Officers who split their annual furloughs;
however, such Officers shall be allowed to take a compensatory time furlough by utilizing elective
days between regularly-scheduled weekends off, subject to manpower requirements.

Furlough schedules may be adjusted to accommodate seasonal operations, significant revision in
organization, work assignments or the number of personnel in particular ranks.

The day-off group of an Officer on furlough (full or split) will not be changed during the remainder
of the week in which the Officer is scheduled to return, unless an Officer who is required to work
on his or her scheduled day(s) off during that week is compensated by the payment of premium
benefits under Article 20 for all hours worked on his or her scheduled day off.

Officers who elect to either split their annual furloughs into two segments or take a full annual
furlough will be returned to the day-off group they were in at the time their furlough or furlough
segments were selected. Affected Officers will notify their unit commanding officer two (2) weeks
prior to the beginning of the furlough segment if their day-off group must be changed to match the

35
original group. The change in day-off group should take place on the Sunday preceding the first day
of the furlough segment.

Section 23.3 — Promotion

Seniority shall be considered in the promotion of Officers covered by this Agreement. In
considering Officers for promotion, seniority shall, in competitive testing, be utilized as a tie-
breaker.

Section 23.4 — Seniority List

The Employer shall prepare a seniority list. The list shall be made available to Officers in each unit
and to the Lodge on the Department’s computerized database, in a format that may be sorted
in seniority and/or alphabetical order.

Section 23.5 — Priority Schedule for Use of Elective Time

Any dispute within a unit as to the selection of a personal day provided for in Section 11.3 shall be
resolved by seniority.

Elective time used for an authorized furlough extension as defined in Section 29.A.4 shall receive
first priority provided that a written request is submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
beginning of a furlough or furlough segment.

Section 23.6 — Overtime for Pre-Planned Events

The following procedures will apply in case of events which will require the cancellation of days
off and for which the Department has received a minimum of 21 days' prior notice.

In those units which have been designated to provide personnel, seniority will be the dominant
factor in the selection of Officers required to work their regular days off, provided that the
Officer to be selected possesses the necessary skill or special qualifications to perform the duties
required. The Employer shall seek volunteers on the basis of seniority from among those
qualified Officers in said unit. If there are insufficient qualified volunteers, the Employer shall
select Officers on the basis of reverse seniority, provided that the Employer may assign
probationary officers without regard to seniority.

   

The Employer will post a notice of such events in the CO book and Officers desiring to exercise
the option to work will notify their unit commanding officer within seven days of the date the notice
was posted.

For the purpose of pre-planned overtime assignments, a unit may be defined as a bureau, division,
district, watch, tactical team, etc.

For duty on election or primary days, seniority will be the dominant factor in the selection of
Officers required to work their regular day off in the polling place. Those Officers who work
overtime will be compensated in accordance with Sections 20.1 and 20.2. For purposes of this
paragraph, Officers in tactical teams on their regular day off shall be treated the same as other
Officers on the same watch in the same district, subject to operational needs.

For purposes of this paragraph, the Employer will select Officers to work a four- (4) hour extended
tour of duty on election or primary days on the basis of seniority from among those qualified Officers
working the affected watch who volunteer for the extended tour. If and to the extent that there are
insufficient volunteers, the Employer shall select Officers from the affected watch on the basis of
reverse seniority.

36
Section 23.7 — Holiday Assignment

When operational considerations require that some Officers of a unit work on a holiday, as defined
in Section 11.1 of this Agreement, the most senior Officers will be given the option to work,
provided that the holiday is not an Officer's regular day off or a part of an Officer's approved
furlough extension and that the Officer pos es the necessary skill or special qualifications to
perform the duties required. When operational considerations require limitations on the
number of Officers who may be given the holiday as a day off, the most senior Officer(s) will
be given the option to take the holiday as a day off, provided the request is submitted seven (7)
days before the holiday.

 

 
  

For the purpose of holiday assignments, a unit may be defined as bureau, division, section, group,
watch, district, etc.

Section 23.8 — Filling Recognized Vacancies

This Section shall apply only to the Public Transportation Section including the Public
Transportation Canine Unit, Public Housing Sections North and South, the Special Activity Section,
Traffic Section/Detail Unit, Traffic Enforcement Unit, Traffic Court/Records Unit, Traffic Safety &
Training Unit, Major Accident Investigation Unit, Loop Traffic, District Law Enforcement, Airport
Law Enforcement North and South, Mounted Unit, Marine Unit, Gun Registration Section, Records
Inquiry Section, Field Inquiry Section, Evidence & Recovered Property Section, Police Document
Services Section, Central Detention Section, Auto Pound Section (D-1 Officers), Electronics and
Motor Maintenance Division (D-1 Officers), Office of Emergency Communications (excluding the
Alternate Response Section), Area Criminal Investigations, Missing Persons Section, Juvenile Court
Liaison Section, Youth Investigation Group Areas (excluding Youth Investigation Group Special
Investigation Unit and Youth Investigation Group Administration), Auto Theft Section, Bomb and
Arson Section (except bomb technicians), excluding the immediate staff of each exempt
commanding officer not to exceed two (2) staff members.

A vacancy for purposes of this Section ("recognized vacancy") exists when an Officer is
transferred, resigns, retires, dies, is discharged, when there are new units created, or when the
Department increases the number of employees in a unit, except for details for not more than three
(3) months and the Summer Lakefront Bike Detail. The Employer shall determine at any time
before said vacancy is filled whether or not a recognized vacancy shall be filled. If and when the
Employer determines to fill a recognized vacancy, this Section shall apply.

In order to avoid the inefficiency of chain-effect bidding, the vacancy created by the reassignment
of a successful bidder shall be a recognized vacancy herein; however, subsequent vacancies created
thereby shall be filled within the Department's discretion. Further, there is no recognized vacancy
created as a result of emergencies, or when an Officer is removed for disciplinary reasons for up to
30 days. When an Officer is removed for disciplinary reasons for more than 30 days, a recognized
vacancy is created.

The Employer shall post a list of recognized vacancies, if any, stating the requirements needed to
fill the opening, at least 14 days before the start of the 28-day police period. A copy of such
postings shall be given to the Lodge. Non-probationary Officers within the same D-1 salary grade
or D-2 job classification, within 72 hours of the time the list has been posted, may bid on a
recognized vacancy in writing on a form to be supplied by the Employer. One copy of the bid
shall be presented to the Employer; one copy shall be forwarded to the Lodge; and one copy shall
be retained by the Officer. Bidding under this Section 23.8 may only be for a recognized vacancy
in a specific unit without regard to shift, day off, unit duty assignments, etc. The Employer shall

37
respond to the successful bidder and the Lodge no later than 3 days prior to the change day for the
new 28-day police period. During the bidding and selection process, the Employer may
temporarily fill a recognized vacancy by assigning an Officer to said vacancy until the recognized
vacancy is filled.

An eligible bidder shall be an Officer who is able to perform in the recognized vacancy to the
satisfaction of the Employer after orientation without further training. The Employer shall select
the most senior qualified bidder when the qualifications of the Officers involved are equal. In
determining qualifications, the Employer shall not be arbitrary or capricious, but shall consider
training, education, experience, skills, ability, demeanor and performance, except that the parties
recognize that the unique operational needs of the Employer require flexibility in the delivery of
public service and to meet this need the Employer may fill 20% of the recognized vacancies
within its discretion, provided that, if the Employer does not utilize any or all of its 20%
exception in any personnel order, the remainder of the unused exception may be carried forward
and used to fill future recognized vacancies within a twelve (12)-month period.

An exception to the above paragraph will apply to Airport Law Enforcement North and South, and
the Traffic Section/ Detail Unit, fifty percent (50%) of all recognized vacancies in each of these
units shall be filled by bid.

Bidding procedures will be done in conformance with the Memorandum of Understanding in this
Agreement. The successful bidder may not bid for another recognized vacancy for one (1) year
unless reassigned by the Employer during that year. A successful bidder may not be reassigned
except for (1) emergencies for the duration of the emergency, (2) for just cause or (3) where the
Superintendent determines that the Officer's continued assignment would interfere with the
Officer's effectiveness in that assignment. When there are no qualified bidders, the Employer may
fill the recognized vacancy within its discretion.

Section 23.9 — Filling Unit Duty Assignments

This Section shall apply only to the following jobs within the units set forth in Section 23.8:
Warrant Clerk, Summary Investigation Detective, Review Investigation Detective, Review Officers,
Detective Division Administrative Desk Duty Assignment, District Desk, District Watch Relief, or
Lockup only as specifically set forth below. The Employer agrees not to eliminate any Unit Duty
Assignments listed in this Section for the duration of this Agreement.

 

An opening in a unit duty assignment for purposes of this Section ("recognized opening") exists
when an Officer performing the above unit duty gnments is to be transferred, resigns, retires,
dies, is discharged, when there are new unit duty assignments created, or when the Department
increases the number of employees in a unit, except for details for not more than three (3) months.
A recognized opening will be created when an Officer is voluntarily detailed and remains absent
from his or her Unit duty assignment for more than three (3) months. An Officer's assignment to a
detail shall not be rolled over solely for the purpose of avoiding the effect of this Section. The
Employer shall determine at any time before said opening is filled whether or not a recognized
opening shall be filled. If the Employer decides to fill a recognized opening utilizing Section 18.4,
the Employer must provide the Lodge with the name of the limited duty Officer within ten (10)
days of filling the recognized opening. If and when the Employer determines to fill a recognized
opening other than utilizing Section 18.4, this Section shall apply. Further, there is no recognized
opening created as a result of emergencies, or when an Officer is removed for disciplinary reasons
for up to thirty (30) days. When an Officer is removed for disciplinary reasons for more than
thirty (30) days or when an Officer is relieved of his or her police powers for more than ninety
(90) days for reasons other than placement on the medical roll, a recognized opening is created.

38

   

 
In the event a recognized opening is to be bid under this Section, the Employer shall post within
the unit on the first Wednesday of the next police period a list of recognized openings therein, if
any, stating the requirements needed to fill the opening. This list will remain posted for seven (7)
calendar days. A copy of such postings shall be given to the Lodge at the time of the bid posting.
Non-probationary Officers within the same unit and within the same D-1, D-2 or D-2A job
classification, may bid on a recognized opening in writing on a form to be supplied by the
Employer. One copy of the bid shall be presented to the Employer, one copy shall be forwarded to
the Lodge, and one copy shall be retained by the Officer. The Employer shall respond to the
successful bidder and the Lodge no later than three (3) days prior to the change day for the new
28-day police period. During the bidding and selection process, the Employer may temporarily fill
a recognized opening by assigning an officer to said opening until the recognized opening is filled
by bid; however, the Employer may not assign Officers to a vacated position to avoid bidding the
recognized opening.

An eligible bidder shall be an Officer who is able to perform in the recognized opening to the
satisfaction of the Employer after orientation. The Employer shall select the most senior qualified
bidder when the qualifications of the Officers involved are equal. In determining qualifications, the
Employer shall not be arbitrary or capricious, but shall consider training, education, experience,
skills, ability, demeanor and performance.

The successful bidder may not bid for another recognized unit duty assignment opening for one
(1) police period year. A successful bidder may not be reassigned except for (1) emergencies for
the duration of the emergency, (2) for just cause, (3) where the Superintendent determines that the
Officer's continued assignment would interfere with the Officer's effectiveness in that assignment,
or (4) temporary unit duty assignments for operational needs, provided the Employer shall not fill
the vacated unit duty assignment. When there are no qualified bidders, the Employer may fill the
recognized opening within its discretion. Unit duty assignments in District Desk, District Watch
Relief, or Lock-up shall be treated in accordance with this Section 23.9 in all respects except the
following: (1) only non-probationary Officers within the same watch and within the same D-1
salary grade shall be eligible to bid for recognized openings in such assignments.

The District Watch Secretary position may be filled at the Employer's discretion. These positions
are limited to one (1) position per watch in each district. If the Employer decides to fill the District
Watch Secretary position, the daily unit duty assignment sheets will identify the Officer assigned
to the District Watch Secretary position. The duties and responsibilities of the District Watch
Secretary are to be determined by the Employer provided that the lockup, review and the desk
Officer bid positions as set forth in the Agreement shall be filled by either the bid Officer or
District Watch Relief personnel prior to filling these positions with the District Watch Secretary.

If the Employer violates this Section by improperly filling a recognized opening by not placing the
opening up for bid, the affected Officer(s) will be compensated at the rate of time and one-half in

quarter hour increments until the violation is remedied. The Employer is granted the ability to
remedy the violation without waiting until the next police period.

If the Employer violates this section by improperly selecting a bidder or improperly determining
qualifications for a recognized opening, the affected Officer(s) will be compensated at the rate of
time and one-half in quarter hour increments up to a maximum of fifty (50) hours of compensatory
time.

Section 23.10 — Non-Disciplinary Demotion

In the event of non-disciplinary demotions for economic reasons, the Employer shall select the most

junior Officer when the qualifications of the Officers involved are equal. In determining
39
qualifications, the Employer shall not be arbitrary and capricious, but shall consider training,
education, experience, skills, ability, demeanor and performance.

Section 23.11 — Details

Officers assigned to units designated to provide personnel to the Summer Mobile Force,
Expressway Detail, Auto Snow Tow Detail, and the Winter Holiday Season Traffic Detail will be
permitted to bid for this detail on the basis of seniority. If and to the extent that there are insufficient
qualified bidders from a designated unit to meet that unit's allocation, the Employer will select
Officers who are deemed qualified by reverse seniority from the designated unit to fill that unit's
allocation.

If the Employer decides to assign an Officer to a detail outside the area, district, or unit, to a sports
event, parade, festival, or labor dispute; or to another event detail which constitutes a tour of duty,
the Employer shall announce the detail at a roll call preceding the event, which roll call is for the
same roll call on the same watch in the same unit from which Officers are to be assigned to the
detail. If notification at roll call is not feasible or appropriate, the Employer shall determine the
method of notification. The Employer shall select Officers to work the detail on the basis of
seniority from among those qualified Officers on said watch who are not in bid jobs and who
volunteer for the detail. If and to the extent that there are insufficient qualified volunteers, the
Employer shall select Officers on the basis of reverse seniority. The Employer may assign
probationary officers during their initial twelve (12) month period of probation without regard to
seniority.

When the Employer decides to assign an Officer to a detail outside the Officer's unit of
assignment for more than ten (10) days to a unit listed in Section 23.8 to provide relief for a
temporary manpower shortage due to furlough, medical, or suspension, the Employer shall select
Officers to work the detail on the basis of seniority from among those qualified Officers who
volunteer for the detail. If and to the extent that there are insufficient volunteers, the Employer
shall select Officers on the basis of reverse seniority, provided that the Employer may assign
probationary officers during their initial twelve (12) month period of probation without regard to
seniority.

When the Employer decides to assign an Officer to a detail outside the Officer's unit of assignment
for more than thirty (30) days to a unit listed in Section 23.8 to provide relief for a temporary
manpower shortage due to the actual strength being more than ten (10%) percent below authorized
strength, the Employer shall select Officers to work the detail on the basis of seniority from among
those qualified Officers who volunteer for the detail. If and to the extent that there are insufficient
volunteers, the Employer shall select Officers on the basis of reverse seniority, provided that the
Employer may assign probationary officers during their initial twelve (12) month period of
probation without regard to seniority.

The Employer's right to assign Tactical Teams, Mission Teams, District Gang Tactical Teams, or
other specialized units shall not be restricted in any way by this Section. In emergency situations, or
situations where the Employer reasonably anticipates civil disorder will occur, or does occur, this
Section shall not apply.

For purposes of bidding, the Employer may disregard seniority if and to the extent necessary to
achieve the balance of experience and qualifications the Employer determines to be desirable in the
detail and unit involved.

For purposes of selecting Officers on the basis of reverse seniority, the Employer may retain a
junior Officer if and to the extent necessary to fulfill operational needs.

40
If the Employer assigns an Officer to a detail or denies an Officer(s) assignment to a detail in any
manner contrary to the provisions of this Agreement, the affected Officer(s) will be entitled to
compensation at the rate of time and one-half in quarter hour increments for the duration of the
detail.

Any time the Employer designates a unit to provide personnel to fill any detail by reverse

seniority, all Officers that have been detailed into that unit for more than ninety (90) days
shall be included as though they were assigned to the unit providing the detail.

Section 23.12 — Reassignment of Duties

No provision in this Agreement shall be deemed to prohibit the Employer from hiring or assigning
any non-bargaining unit personnel to perform any unit duties as described in Appendix B and/or C,
provided that no Officer covered by this Agreement shall be laid off either as a result thereof or if
his or her non-bargaining unit replacement, if any, has not been laid off.

Any Officer who is to be displaced by a non-bargaining unit person shall be given 60 days' prior
notice of said displacement. The Employer shall designate the positions and duties to which
displaced Officers shall be assigned. Displaced Officers may be assigned to other job duties
within the same unit without regard to Section 23.8 and 23.9. If the Employer decides to assign
displaced Officers to different units, such displaced Officers shall be permitted to bid for such
assignments which the Employer decides to fill with such Officers on the basis of seniority and
qualifications in accordance with Section 23.8. If Officers other than those displaced are
permitted by the Employer to bid for such assignments, then all the displaced Officers shall be
deemed to be more senior than all of the non-displaced bidders for purposes of said bid.

An Officer who has been given a limited duty assignment pursuant to Section 18.3 shall not be
displaced from limited duty under Section 23.12 for the duration of his or her eligibility for limited
duty.

Section 23.13 —Acting Desk Sergeant

Officers regularly assigned to District Desk duties by virtue of successful bid under the provisions
of Section 23.9 shall be given the option by seniority for the assignment as Acting District Desk
Sergeant.

ARTICLE 24 — EDUCATIONAL REIMBURSEMENT

Employer agrees to provide tuition reimbursement to Officers for extra-departmental education
subject to the following conditions:

A. To be eligible for reimbursement:
1. Each course taken must be job-related or necessary for a degree.

2. Proof of acceptance for a degree program must be presented upon request.
3. Each course taken must grant college level credit.
4. Each course must be taken through an accredited college or university.

B. Employees must file applications for reimbursement on the appropriate forms
no later than thirty (30) days after the beginning of the course of study.

C. Reimbursement will be granted on the following basis:
1. Grade "A" 100%
2. Grade "B" 15%

41
and other grades classified by the school as passing.
Effective for Officers first enrolled in graduate programs (including but not limited to

any advanced or any professional degree programs) on or after September 1, 2016,
reimbursement will be granted on the following basis:

1.Grade “A” 75%
2. Grade “B” 50%
and other grades classified by the school as passing

Effective for Officers first enrolled in graduate programs (including but not limited to
any advanced or professional degree programs) on or after September 1, 2016, the
Employer shall grant reimbursement based on the full cost of tuition, exclusive of any
scholarships, grants, reduced tuition, discounts, or other funds; provided, however,
that any scholarships, grants, reduced tuition, discounts, or other funds must not be of
general applicability to all other students in the program, but must be specific to the
Officer’s unique achievements or qualities or applicable only to police Officers or
public safety employees.

Reimbursement may be denied if an Officer’s work performance is deemed inadequate or if
an Officer has a record of sustained infractions of Department orders, directives or
procedures.

Reimbursement will not be granted if:
1. Tuition costs are covered by Veteran's Administration or other funds, or

2. The program in which the Officer is enrolled is reimbursable through a federal grant-in-
aid program for which the Officer is eligible.

Reimbursement will be made for a maximum of two (2) courses per school
term.

Reimbursement will be granted when an Officer is required by the Superintendent of Police
to attend an educational or training program.

If an Officer obtains an undergraduate or graduate degree with the assistance of the tuition
reimbursement program, and the Officer, within one (1) year of obtaining such degree,
voluntarily resigns from the Department, all tuition costs (100%) reimbursed to the Officer
by the Employer for obtaining such a degree shall be repaid to the Employer. If the Officer
voluntarily resigns after one (1) year but less than two (2) years after obtaining the degree,
the Officer shall repay one-half (50%) of the tuition reimbursement to the Employer. If the
Officer does not complete the degree program and voluntarily resigns from the Department,
the Officer shall repay 100% of all tuition reimbursement received for any course
completed within two (2) years of such resignation. Officers receiving tuition
reimbursement for such degrees shall, as a condition of receiving such reimbursement,
execute an appropriate form consistent with this paragraph.

The provision shall not apply to reimbursement under Subsection H of this Article, nor shall
this provision apply to Officers who resign from the Department for the purpose of accepting
employment within another City of Chicago Department.

42
ARTICLE 25 — LIFE AND HEALTH INSURANCE PROVISIONS
Section 25.1 — Life Insurance

The Employer agrees to provide a $75,000 life insurance benefit at no cost to the Officer; and
AD&D shall be $5,000.

The Employer agrees to provide procedures for Officers to purchase optional Group Term Life
Insurance and Universal Life Insurance in addition to basic Group Term Life Insurance coverage
provided above, for which the cost to the Officer shall not exceed the current cost negotiated by
the Employer. Officers will be permitted to purchase any amount of optional insurance coverage in
multiples of up to ten times the Officer’s annual salary, rounded up to the next $1,000.00, not
to exceed $1,500,000.

Section 25.2 — Medical and Dental Plans

The Employer's medical, dental, and prescription drug plans are incorporated by reference into this
Agreement. All newly hired employees shall be required to participate in the PPO plan for the first
eighteen (18) months of their employment. These employees shall be eligible to participate in the
first open enrollment period following the eighteen (18) month anniversary of their dates of hire.

The Employer shall provide Officers with the opportunity to enroll in a Flexible Spending
Account ("FSA") plan, which will permit Officers to fund, on a pre-tax basis, an individual
account that the Officer may use to pay for qualified unreimbursed medical expenses, as provided
under Section 213 of the Internal Revenue Code. Subject to IRS regulations, the FSA will allow
participants to pay the following qualified expenses on a pre-tax basis: dental expenses; vision
expenses; health plan contributions, deductibles, and co-payments; prescription drug co-payments
and payments for over-the-counter drugs; and other unreimbursed medical expenses. Participation
is voluntary and participants may contribute up to $5,000 annually on a pre-tax basis, which will
be deducted pro-rata each payroll period. Officers may enroll in the FSA or change the amount of
their election once per year during open enrollment or when they have a change in family status.
As mandated by the Internal Revenue Code, a "use it or lose it" rule applies to Section 125 plans.
Any amount that remains in the participant's account at the end of the year will be forfeited.
During open enrollment, the parties will engage in a joint educational campaign to inform
Officers of the benefits of the FSA plan and otherwise increase employee participation in such
plan.

 
  

The Employer shall make available to Officers covered under this Agreement and their eligible
dependents summaries of the benefits provided by the Employer's health care plan either
electronically or in print. The cost of such coverage to be borne by the Employer.

The plans for medical, dental, and prescription drug benefits, including the provisions on eligibility
and self-contribution rules in effect as of the date of this Agreement, may not be changed by the
Employer without the agreement of the Lodge.

The medical plan (health insurance plan) shall consist of two (2) separate alternative coverages — a
PPO plan ("PPO"); and an HMO plan ("HMO"). In the event that a new health care plan becomes
available to the City during a Plan year, the Employer shall have the right to include that new plan
in the Plan alternatives upon reasonable prior notice to and discussion with the Lodge.

The Employer agrees to make available to the following other persons the above-described

hospitalization and medical program and the dental plan: Officers covered by this Agreement who

retire on or after age 60 and their eligible dependents; surviving spouse and children of Officers
43
covered by this Agreement killed in the line of duty; Officers covered by this Agreement on a
leave of absence for disability (both duty and occupational) and their eligible dependents; and the
surviving spouse and children of deceased Officers covered by this Agreement who were formerly
on pension disability (both duty and occupational.) The Employer will contribute the full cost of
coverage for any of the above-enumerated Officers covered by this Agreement who elect coverage
under any plan or plans. However, coverage under a plan for Officers covered by this Agreement
shall terminate when an Officer covered by this Agreement either reaches the age for full Medicare
eligibility under federal law or ceases to be a dependent as defined in a plan, whichever occurs
first. After an Officer covered by this Agreement reaches the age for full Medicare eligibility, that
Officer shall be covered under the medical program for annuitants, provided the person pays the
applicable contributions.

Section 25.3 —Ambulance Fees

Officers and their eligible dependents and retirees and their spouses will be exempt from fees for
emergency medical services performed by the Chicago Fire Department.

Section 25.4 — Labor Management Committee on Health Care.

The City of Chicago and the Lodge hereby establish the "Labor Management Committee on Health
Care." The Committee shall consist of four representatives selected by the Fraternal Order of Police,
Chicago Lodge No. 7 and four representatives elected by the City, plus the City Comptroller or his
or her designee, who shall serve as Committee Chair. The Committee shall meet not less than once
each calendar quarter.

The purpose of the Committee shall be to monitor the performance of the City's health care plan and
to discuss ways to improve plan operation and administration on an on-going basis, including such
items as:

 

— the prescription drug plan, provider network and the mail order program,
— carve-outs for administrative efficiency and benefit efficiency,

— revisions to the list of providers participating in the hospital PPO,

— revision to the list of providers participating in the physician PPO.

This Committee is advisory only. It is intended to promote collaboration and discussion over the
efficient and cost-effective operation of the benefit plan. It in no way diminishes the right regarding
the benefit plan contained in any collective bargaining agreement nor does it in any way diminish
the responsibilities, right and prerogatives of the City regarding the administration of the plan.

The size and composition of this Committee may be increased upon agreement of the parties.

ARTICLE 26 —WAGES

Section 26.1 — Salary Schedule

A. Effective July 1, 2012, the basic salary of all Officers covered by this Agreement shall be
increased as follows: effective July 1, 2012, two percent (2%); effective January 1, 2013,
two percent (2%); effective January 1, 2014, two percent (2%); effective January 1, 2015,
one percent (1%); effective January 1, 2016, one percent (1%); effective July 1, 2016, two
percent (2%); effective January 1, 2017, one percent (1%).

The salary schedule for employees with more than thirty (30) years of service prior to January
1, 2006 is set forth in Appendix A, "Salary Schedule for Officers on Step 11 Prior to January

44
1, 2006."

Officers covered by this Agreement who are assigned as Armorer, Canine Handler, Evidence
Technician, Explosives Detection Canine Handler, Extradition Officer, Fingerprint Examiner,
Field Training Officer, Marine Unit Officer, Mounted Patrol Unit Officer, Police Agent, Police
Technician or Traffic Specialist shall receive D-2 pay as base salary. Effective January 1,
2015, Officers covered by this Agreement who are assigned as Helicopter Pilots shall
receive D-2 as base salary and shall not forfeit their grade and pay status if such status is
higher than D-2 pay.

Officers covered by this Agreement who hold the position of Detective shall
receive D-2A pay as bas lary.

  

Officers covered by this Agreement who are assigned as a Field Training Officer shall
continue to be allowed to work up to an additional one-half (1/2) hour per day prior to or at the
conclusion of his or her tour of duty which time is to be compensated in accord with Article
20-Overtime.

Officers covered by this Agreement who are assigned as Explosive Technician I, Firearms
Identification Technician I, Legal Officer I, Police Forensic Investigator I, Security Specialist,
or Supervising Substance Abuse Counselor shall receive D-3 pay as base salary.

During the term of this Agreement, should there be enacted into law legislation pursuant
to which Officers covered by this Agreement are required to increase their contributions
to the Policemen’s Annuity and Benefit Fund of the Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/5-
101 et seq.) or any successor pension fund in an amount above the amount of the current
annual contribution of 9% of salary, the Lodge may reopen this Agreement solely on the
issues of base salary and percentage increases (“Salary”) and Duty Availability Pay for
the purpose of renegotiating the Salary and Duty Availability Pay increases which shall
be paid to Officers. The Lodge shall have thirty (30) days from the date it receives notice
that the contributions will increase to notify the Employer, in writing, by certified mail,
of its intent to reopen this Agreement. The notice referred to shall be considered to have
been given as of the date shown on the postmark. Written notice may be tendered in
person, in which case the date of notice shall be the written date of receipt. In the event
this Agreement is reopened pursuant to this provision, the Salary and Duty Availability
Pay increases set forth in this Agreement will not be changed or reduced without the
written consent of the Lodge. The Employer and the Lodge shall have ninety (90) days to
renegotiate the Salary and Duty Availability Pay increases set forth in this Agreement. In
the event the parties are unable to resolve these issues during the ninety (90)-day
negotiation period, or within any mutually agreed to extension, the dispute shall be
submitted to the impasse resolution procedure set forth in Section 28.3(B).

Section 26.2 — Bi-lingual Compensation

All Officers covered by the terms of this Agreement who are capable of reading, writing and
translating a language other than English into the English language and English into a language

other than English who are directed to perform such services by a supervisor o

ide of his or her

 

unit shall be entitled to compensation for the time spent performing such services at the rate of time
and one-half

Officers who are directed to report to duty or remain on duty to perform such services at a time other
than their regularly-assigned duty hours or perform such services during their regularly-scheduled

45
duty hours will receive a minimum of two hours of compensation and such compensation will be at
the rate of time and one-half.

In order to be eligible for the benefits of this section, an Officer must be certified by the Department
and placed on an eligibility list. The Department may promulgate rules to determine who is capable
to perform such services. Subject to the above criteria and the ability to perform the assigned task,
opportunities to provide such services will be rotated on the basis of the Officer's seniority.

Section 26.3 — Work Out of Grade

A. Any Officer covered by this Agreement being paid D-1 salary who is directed to perform
substantially all the duties and assumes substantially all the responsibilities of a Field Training
Officer for two (2) or more hours within a single eight (8)-hour tour of duty, shall be paid at a
D-2 rate consistent with his or her own tenure for an eight (8) hour tour of duty, or for the time
spent, whichever is greater.

Any Officer covered by this Agreement being paid D-1 or D-2 salary who is directed to
perform substantially all the duties and assumes substantially all the responsibilities of
Sergeant (other than in the Internal Affairs Division, Training Division, or Research and
Development Division) or a Forensic Investigator for more than two (2) hours within a single
eight (8)-hour tour of duty, shall be paid at a D-3 rate consistent with his or her own tenure for
an eight (8)-hour tour of duty, or for the time spent, whichever is greater.

B. Any Officer covered by this Agreement regularly assigned to a position which is paid at a D-2
or D-2A rate, who is temporarily detailed to perform the work of a lower rated employee,
which work is normally paid at the D-1 or D-2 rate, shall continue to be paid at the D-2 or D-
2A rate for such work. This paragraph B does not apply to demotions or reassignments.

Section 26.4 — Payment of Wages

Except for delays caused by payroll changes, data processing or other breakdowns, or other
causes outside the Employer's control, the Employer shall continue its practice with regard to the
payment of wages, which generally is: (1) payment of wages provided herein shall be due and
payable to an Officer no later than the Ist and 16th of each month, (2) holiday premium pay shall
be due and payable to the Officer no later than the 22nd day of the month following the month in
which the holiday premium was earned, (3) other premium pay shall be payable to the Officer no
later than the last day of the period following the period in which the premium work was
performed. The Employer shall not change said pay days except after notice to, and, if requested
by the Lodge, negotiating with the Lodge. "Negotiating," for the purposes of this Section, shall
mean as it is defined in Section 8(d) of the National Labor Relations Act.

Effective no later than July 1, 2015, printed check stubs given to Officers on each payday
shall include the Officer’s PC number and no personal identifiers and Officers shall have
the option of receiving check stubs online.

Section 26.5 — Payment of Time

An Officer covered by this Agreement who resigns, retires or dies, shall be entitled to and shall
receive all unused compensatory time accumulated by said Officer including furlough time, baby
furlough days, personal days, and holidays. An Officer who is separated for cause shall be
entitled to receive only unused compensatory time accumulated as a result of earned overtime for
hours worked in excess of 171 per 28-day period.

46
ARTICLE 27 — RESIDENCY
All Officers covered by this Agreement shall be actual residents of the City of Chicago.

ARTICLE 28 — DURATION, ENFORCEMENT AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION

Section 28.1 — Term of Agreement

This Agreement shall be effective from July 1, 2012 and shall remain in full force and effect until
June 30, 2017. It shall continue in effect from year to year thereafter unless notice of termination is
given, in writing, by certified mail, by either party no earlier than February 1, 2017 and no later than
March 1, 2017. The notices referred to shall be considered to have been given as of the date shown
on the postmark. Written notice may be tendered in person, in which case the date of notice shall be
the written date of receipt. It is mutually agreed that the Articles and Sections shall constitute the
Agreement between the parties for the period defined in this Section.

Section 28.2 — Continuing Effect

Notwithstanding any provision of this Article or Agreement to the contrary, this Agreement shall
remain in full force and effect after any expiration date while negotiations or Resolution of Impasse
Procedure are continuing for a new Agreement or part thereof between the Parties.

Section 28.3 — Impasse Resolution, Ratification and Enactment

A. Ifthe parties reach a complete agreement as to the items for negotiation at the
end of any negotiating period, the following procedure shall apply:

1. The agreement will first be presented to the Lodge membership with the recommendation
of the Executive Board for ratification.

2. Within ten (10) days after such ratification by the Lodge membership, the agreement will
be submitted to the City Council of the City of Chicago, with the Superintendent of Police
and the Mayor's recommendation for ratification and concurrent adoption in ordinance
form pursuant to the City's Home Rule authority. The Employer and Lodge shall
cooperate to secure this legislative approval.

3. In the event the City Council should reject the recommended agreement, the parties shall
meet again within ten (10) days of the Council's vote to discuss the reasons for the
Council's rejection and to determine whether any modifications can be made to deal with
the problems; but either party may thereafter invoke arbitration in accordance with
Section 28.3(B) of this Article upon ten (10) days' written notice to the other party.

For purposes of this Article, rejection by the City Council means affirmative rejection by a
three-fifths (3/5) vote of the members of the City Council within thirty (30) days of the date
the contract is submitted to it.

B. If complete agreement is not reached between the parties as to the items for negotiation at the
end of any negotiating period, the following procedure shall apply:

1. In the event that disputed items cannot be resolved during the negotiation period, all
disputed items shall be referred to a three person Arbitration Board, one member to be
selected by each of the parties and the third member to be jointly agreed upon by the
parties.

2. A Dispute Resolution Board shall be convened and shall be composed of three (3)
persons: one appointed by the Employer, one appointed by the Lodge and one impartial
member to be mutually selected and agreed upon by the Employer and the Lodge. If, after

47
a period of five (5) days from the date of the appointment of the two representatives of the
parties, the remaining Board member has not been selected or otherwise agreed upon, then
either representative may request the American Arbitration Association, or its successor in
function, to furnish a list of seven members of said service from which the remaining
Board member shall be selected. The Association shall be advised that the eligibility for
names to be placed upon the list shall include the following: membership in the National
Academy of Arbitrators; at least five (5) years' experience in labor relations dispute
resolutions in either the private or public sector; United States citizenship; and a
commitment by any such individual that, if appointed or selected, said individual agrees to
comply with the time limits set forth in subsection 28.3(B)5, below. Upon mutual written
agreement of the Employer and the Lodge, the parties' right to appoint any Board
members other than the impartial member may be mutually waived.

The list shall be immediately published and the representative appointed
by the Employer shall within five (5) days after publication of said list eliminate three (3)
names from the list. Within two (2) days after such elimination, the representative
appointed by the Lodge shall eliminate three (3) names from the list. The remaining
individual, plus the individual appointed by the Employer and the individual appointed by
the Lodge, shall compose the Dispute Resolution Board.

The member of the Dispute Resolution Board selected, pursuant to subsection 28.3(B)3,
above, shall act as Chairman. He or she shall be an impartial, competent and reputable
individual and shall be administered and subscribe to the constitutional oath or affirmation
of office. The Employer and the Lodge shall each pay half of the fees and expenses of the
impartial member.

The Chairman shall have the authority to convene and adjourn proceedings, administer
oaths, compel testimony and/or documents, and employ such clerical or research
nce as in his or her judgment and discretion are deemed warranted. He or she
shall convene proceedings on the issues presented to the Dispute Resolution Board
within ten (10) days after his or her appointment and/or selection; and the Board shall
make its determination within thirty (30) days after it has convened. The time limits set
forth herein may be extended only upon written mutual agreement of both the Board
member appointed by the Lodge and the Board member appointed by the Employer.

 

The Employer and the Lodge shall attempt to agree upon a written statement of the issue
or issues to be presented to the Board. In lieu of, or in addition to, such mutual statement
of issues, each party may also present its own list or statement of issues, provided only
that any such issue not mutually agreed upon shall have been an issue previously the
subject of negotiations or presentation at negotiations. During the course of proceedings,
the Chairman of the Board shall have the authority as necessary to maintain decorum and
order and may direct, (absent mutual agreement) the order of procedure; the rules of
evidence or procedure in any court shall not apply or be binding. The actual proceedings
shall not be open to the public and the parties understand and agree that the provisions of
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq. are not applicable. If, in the opinion of the impartial member of the
Board, it would be appropriate in his or her discretion to meet with either the Employer or
Lodge for mediation or conciliation functions, the Board may do so, provided only that
notice of such meetings shall be communicated to the other party.

The compensation, if any, of the representatives appointed by the Lodge shall be paid by
the Lodge. The compensation of the representative appointed by the Employer shall be
paid by the Employer.

48
8. The terms decided upon by the Board shall be included in an agreement to be submitted to
the City Council for adoption. The terms of this Agreement shall continue to bind both
parties hereto during all negotiations and impasse resolution procedures.

9. If the City Council should reject the arbitrated agreement, the parties shall meet
again within ten (10) days of the Council's vote to discuss the reasons for the
Council's rejection and to determine whether any modifications can be made to deal
with the problems; but either party may thereafter terminate this Agreement upon ten
(10) days' written notice to the other.

 

10. There shall be no implementation of any provisions of a successor agreement without
Council ratification and adoption in ordinance form of the agreement; except, however,
that the terms of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effective until a successor
agreement is adopted in ordinance form or this Agreement is terminated pursuant to
subparagraph 28.3(B)9.

11. As permitted by 5 ILCS 315/14(p), the impasse resolution procedure set forth herein above
shall govern in lieu of the statutory impasse resolution procedure provided under 5 ILCS
315/14, except that the following portions of said 315/14 shall nevertheless apply;
Subsections (h),(i), (k) and (m).

ARTICLE 29 — BABY FURLOUGH DAYS
Section 29.1

Officers with the following years of service as determined by the Officer's seniority date shall
receive the following number of Baby Furlough Days (BFD) (eight (8) hours for each BFD) for
each calendar year:

 

Years of Service Baby Furlough Days
15 or more 6
10 but less than 15 5
5 but less than 10 4
1 but less than 5 3

Section 29.2

An Officer's BFD shall be granted pursuant to and in accordance with the Department's policy of
granting compensatory time off, except if an Officer elects not to use or is denied all his or her BFD
in a calendar year, he or she may, at his or her option, carry over for use as days off in the next year
four (4) of his or her BFD to the next succeeding calendar year.

Section 29.3

Any BFD not used in a calendar year shall be paid to the eligible Officer in the following
calendar year, except as provided for in Section 29.2 above. Payment shall be based upon the salary
schedule in effect at the time of payment. Payment shall be made by April 1 for BFD not used in the
preceding calendar year.

ARTICLE 29A — FURLOUGHS
Section 29A.1

Furlough shall be granted to Officers for each calendar year of this Agreement.

49
Section 29A.2

Officers with the following years of service shall receive the following number of furlough
(vacation) days:

Years of Service Furlough Days

1 but less than 5 years 20 Straight Days
5 but less than 10 years 24 Straight Days
10 but less than 15 years 22 Working Days
15 years or more 25 Working Days

Effective January 1, 2016, and thereafter, Officers with the following years of service shall
receive the following number of furlough (vacation) days:

 

Years of Service Furlough Days

1 but less than 4 years 20 Straight Days

4 but less than 9 years 24 Straight Days

9 but less than 14 years 22 Working Days

14 years or more 25 Working Days
Section 29A.3

Furlough shall be selected in accordance with this Agreement and procedure subject to operational
needs, and approved individual furlough days may be taken by Officers so requesting at the
discretion of the Department.

Section 29A.4

Furlough may be extended at the request of an Officer with the approval of the Department by the
use of any accumulated compensatory time, baby furlough days, personal days and individual
furlough days. A furlough extension is defined as the Sunday through Wednesday prior to the start
of a furlough or the Thursday through Saturday at the completion of the furlough.

ARTICLE 30 — PERSONAL LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 30.1 — Personal Leave

Applications for personal leaves of absence shall be governed by the applicable provisions of the
City of Chicago Personnel Rules as in effect on December 31, 1983, provided that the Lodge shall
be promptly notified of all personal leaves of absence and extensions thereof taken by Officers
covered by this Agreement.

Section 30.2 — Military Leave

Any Officer who is a member of a reserve force or a national guard of the United States or of the
State of Illinois, and who is ordered by appropriate authorities to attend a training program or to
perform other duties under the supervision of the United States or the State of Illinois, shall be
granted paid leave of absence during the period of such activity, not to exceed fourteen (14)
calendar days in any calendar year, in the case of a member of a reserve force, and not to exceed
fifteen (15) calendar days in the case of the National Guard. Employees hired after 1 January 1997
shall deposit their military pay with the City Comptroller for all days compensated by the City of
Chicago.

50
Effective January 1, 2005, Officers who are deployed for military service in excess of fifteen (15)
calendar days in a combat zone (as designated pursuant to the Executive Orders of the President of
the United States) shall not be required to reimburse the Employer the amount of military pay they
receive. The Employer will continue to make its pension contributions for such Officers.

The Employer acknowledges and agrees that in the event local, Illinois or Federal law, as such
laws may be amended from time to time, mandates greater benefits than as set forth in this
Section, it will apply the provisions of such law(s) to Officers.

ARTICLE 31 — STEADY WATCH
Section 31.1 — Implementation

A. 1. District and units in which assigned Officers have selected a steady watch will continue to
select a steady watch each year. These units include the following:

District Law Enforcement

Airport Law Enforcement (O'Hare and Midway)
Bomb and Arson Unit

Central Detention

Crime Lab (including Mobile Crime Unit)
Detective Division

Evidence & Recovered Property

Marine Unit

Major Accident Investigation

Mounted Unit

Office of Emergency Communications (COS)
Public Transportation (including Canine)
Traffic Enforcement

2. The Employer will not expand excluded units or assign Officers to excluded units for the
purpose of avoiding the provisions of this Article.

B. It is the intention that the above units will continue on steady watch. In the event that there is a
dispute as to whether a newly created unit is susceptible to steady watches, the dispute shall
first be subject to procedures set forth at Section 31.7 hereof, then Section 31.8, if available, or
the dispute resolution as set forth in Article 28.

Section 31.2 —Alternate Response Section Bidding

Officers who are detailed to the Alternate Response Section will be allowed to bid by seniority for
a steady watch subject to the following provisions:

A. Fifty percent, up to a maximum of thirty-one (31), of the most senior Officers who are in a
convalescent duty status or limited duty status and have been detailed to the Alternate
Response Section for a minimum of two (2) years will be allowed to bid for a steady watch.

B. The Employer will calculate the number of eligible bidders and identify the number of
positions on each watch that will be put to bid.

51
C. This bidding procedure is to be done on an annual basis prior to the Annual Furlough
Selection. The Filling of Vacancies provision of Section 31.5 and the Temporary Watch
Assignments provision of Section 31.6 do not apply to the Alternate Response Section.
Vacancies that occur after the annual bidding process will be filled at the Employer’s
discretion.

D. Successful bidders may be removed at any time from their bidded watch by the Employer if:
1) it can be demonstrated that the Officer’s continued assignment to the watch would interfere
with the Officer’s effectiveness in that assignment; 2) there are emergencies, for the duration
of the emergency; or 3) there is just cause for removal.

 

Section 31.3 — Exclusions

The following Officers are not subject to the bid process for steady watch assignments: Officers
voluntarily assigned as Tactical Officers, Officers voluntarily assigned to Foot Patrol in the Ist
and 18th Districts, the immediate staff of each commanding officer and the District Law
Enforcement Community Policing Officers (including Senior Services Officers) are not subject
to the bid process for steady watch assignments. The Employer will not expand the excluded
assignments or assign Officers to the excluded assignments for the purpose of avoiding the
provisions of this Article.

For the purposes of this Section, the number of excluded staff positions is limited to two (2) staff
members. For the purposes of this Section, the number of excluded Community Policing Officers is
limited to seven (7); five (5) on the second watch and two (2) on the third watch. In the event that
the staff members or Community Policing Officers are removed from that assignment, said Officers
shall not be involuntarily removed from their assigned watch for the remainder of the calendar year
unless they are affected by reverse seniority required movements.

In the event that a tactical Officer is involuntarily removed from the tactical team, said Officer will
be given the opportunity to submit a bid for a steady watch assignment. The Officer's bid will be
honored and the Officer will be granted a bid position and be added to the watch the Officer would
have been eligible to bid for if he or she would have bid during the annual selection process.

Section 31.4 —Annual Selection Process

Prior to the Annual Furlough Selection, steady watch assignments shall be made in the following
manner:

The Employer shall determine and post the number of positions to be assigned to each watch. Eighty
(80%) percent of the positions on each watch included in this Article shall first be selected by
seniority, and such seniority bid assignments shall be made before any discretionary assignments are
filled by the Employer. The biddable opening on each watch shall be awarded to the most senior
qualified bidder within that district or unit who has the present ability to perform all of the available
duties to the reasonable satisfaction of the Employer. Any Officer performing a duty assignment
anywhere in the Department shall be presumptively considered able to perform to the satisfaction of
the Department. The remaining twenty (20%) percent of those positions shall be filled at the
discretion of the Employer.

Within ten (10) days of the date of the annual selection of watch assignments, the Employer shall
provide the Lodge with documentation of the number of allocated personnel by watch, a list of
successful bidders by watch, and a list of Officers assigned by the Department's discretionary
percentage by watch.

The annual furlough selection by seniority on the watch shall continue to be made in accordance

52
with the historic practices and procedures of the Department.
Section 31.5 — Filling of Vacancies

Except for those exclusions set forth in Section 31.2 and Section 31.3 above, vacancies in steady
watch assignments occurring after the Annual Selection Process shall be filled in the manner
provided for in this Section. A vacancy exists when an Officer performing the assignment is
permanently transferred, permanently reassigned, resigns, retires, dies, is separated, or when the
Department increases the number of Officers in a unit on a specific watch.

Vacancies shall be filled as follows: if the vacancy is a bid vacancy, i.e., the previous incumbent
held the position by bid, then the vacancy shall be filled by bid. If the previous incumbent had been
appointed at the discretion of the Employer, then the vacancy shall be filled at the discretion of the
Employer.

If and when the Employer decides to fill a recognized watch vacancy by bid, such vacancy to be bid
shall be posted on the seventh calendar day (Wednesday) of the Third, Sixth, and Ninth Police
Periods and shall remain posted for seven (7) calendar days from the day of posting. The vacancy
shall be filled by the most senior qualified Officer bidding for the vacancy. If no such qualified
Officer within the unit bids for such vacancy, the Employer may fill the watch vacancy by reverse
seniority. Any Officer performing the duty assignment anywhere in the unit shall be presumptively
considered able to perform to the satisfaction of the Employer.

Officers who are newly assigned to a unit may be placed on a watch at the Employer's discretion
until such time as the Officer accepts a management position or is able to bid on a vacancy at the
next regularly-scheduled vacancy posting during the Third, Sixth, or Ninth Police Period.

Within ten (10) days of the date of the watch vacancy filling, the Employer shall provide the Lodge
with documentation of the number of vacancies filled by watch, the number of additional allocated
personnel by watch, a list of successful bidders by watch, and a list of Officers assigned by the
Department's discretionary percentage by watch.

Section 31.6 — Temporary Watch Assignments

For the purpose of filling a temporary vacancy in order to provide relief (i.e., vacation, medical,
suspension, detail, etc.) for a police period, the Employer shall first designate the watch(es) to
provide the relief and shall seek volunteers to satisfy its needs from the specific watch(es). If
there are more volunteers than required, the volunteer with the greatest seniority from the
designated watch(es) shall be selected. If there are not sufficient volunteers, the Officer with the
lowest seniority from the designated watch(es) shall be selected.

Once watch assignments are made, changes will not be made except for: (1) Officers identified as
Personnel Concerns, (2) Officers in a limited or convalescent duty for the duration of that status, (3)
Officers on restricted duty, (4) Officers who have been relieved of their police powers, (5) to fill a
temporary vacancy not to exceed three periods (for example, furlough, suspension, medical, detail),
initially filled by volunteers, then by reverse seniority, or (6) upon mutual agreement of the
Officer seeking the change and the Department (provided no such agreement shall involuntarily
displace any other Officer's selected watch assignment). These changes in watch assignments
shall be made only for the duration of the circumstances giving rise to the change, after which
the Officer will return to his or her previous watch assignment and will be made only for
operational needs.

When watch assignments are changed in accordance with the provisions of this Section, the
provisions of Article 20 shall not apply. Changes in watch assignment not in accordance with the
provision of this Section shall require compensation of the Officer in accordance with Article 20
(i.e., time and one-half for all hours worked outside of the Officer's selected watch).

53
Section 31.7 — Joint Labor Management Committee

Upon the effective date of this Agreement, there shall be a Joint Watch Selection Committee
established to promptly address errors and omissions in the bidding of steady watch assignments.
The parties agree that such 2 Committee is necessary as a means by which complaints and/or
grievances can be resolved without the delay inherent in the arbitration process. The Committee
will consist of the Commanding Officer of the Management & Labor Affairs Section and the
Lodge's Grievance Committee Chairperson, or their designees. The Committee will meet within
five (5) working days of a request by either party for the purpose of resolving the dispute. A
decision by the Joint Committee will be binding on the Employer and the Lodge. A mediator
may be used if either party requests. The cost of the mediator will be split evenly between the
parties. In the event the Joint Committee cannot agree on a resolution of the dispute, then either
party may invoke the provisions of Section 31.8.

Section 31.8 — Dispute Resolution

In the event the parties are unable to resolve disputes regarding the application of the terms of this

Article, then either party may invoke expedited arbitration in accordance with the following

procedure and the arbitration hearing shall commence within thirty (30) days of the demand for

expedited arbitration unless the parties otherwise agree:

A. The parties shall mutually select an Arbitrator from among the following 3
names:

 

If the parties cannot mutually agree, the Arbitrator selected shall be the one who will provide
the parties with the earliest available hearing date for an expedited arbitration hearing:

B. Recognizing that the parties have agreed to the steady watch concept and the selection process
therefore, the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator is for the purpose of addressing problems that may
arise which unreasonably interfere with the effective performance of the Department's mission;

C. The Arbitrator shall render his or her decision within 72 hours of the close of
the hearing, or such other time upon which the parties mutually agree.

ARTICLE 32 — COMPLETE AGREEMENT

The parties acknowledge that during the negotiations which preceded this Agreement, each had the
unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject or
matter not removed by law from the area of collective bargaining. The understandings and
agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in
this Agreement. Except as may be stated in this Agreement, each party voluntarily and
unqualifiedly waives the right, and each agrees that the other shall not be obligated to bargain
collectively with respect to any subject or matter referred to, or covered in this Agreement or with
respect to any subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered in this Agreement, even
though such subjects or matters may not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of either
or both of the parties at the time they negotiated and signed this Agreement.

ARTICLE 33 — SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any provisions of this Agreement or any application thereof should be rendered or declared
unlawful, invalid or unenforceable by virtue of any judicial action, or by any existing or
subsequently enacted Federal or State legislation, or by Executive Order or other competent
authority, the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect. In
such event, upon the request of either party, the parties shall meet promptly and negotiate with

54
54
respect to substitute provisions for those provisions rendered or declared unlawful, invalid, or
unenforceable.
This Agreement became effective on _November 18 , 2014.

x
In witness whereof, the parties hereto affix their signatures this \Q_ day of November, 2014.

For the City of Chicago, an For the Fraternal Order of Police,
Illinois Municipal Corporation Chicago Lodge No. 7
Rahm Emanuel Dean C, elo, Sr.
Mayor President
Garry F. y
Superintendent of Police
5S
APPENDIX A
SALARY SCHEDULE FOR SWORN POLICE PERSONNEL - 2012-2017

2.0% INCREASE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012 (Officers with Seniority Dates Earlier Than January 1, 1975, See Page 63)

GRADE

1 ANNUAL
MONTHLY

2 ANNUAL
MONTHLY

2A ANNUAL
MONTHLY

3 ANNUAL
MONTHLY

FIRST
12 MOS

STEP 1

43,968.00
3,664.00

62,760.00
5,230.00
64,914.00
5,409.50
72,486.00
6,040.50

AFTER
12 MOS

STEP 2

62,760.00
5,230.00

66,318.00
5,526.50
68,598.00
5,716.50
76,080.00
6,340.00

AFTER
18 MOS

STEP 3

66,318.00
5,526.50

69,750.00
5,812.50
72,066.00
6,005.50
79,956.00
6,663.00

AFTER
30 MOS

STEP 4

69,750.00
5,812.50

73,182.00
6,098.50
75,564.00
6,297.00
84,018.00

7,001.50

AFTER
42 MOS

STEP 5

73,182.00
6,098.50

76,878.00
6,406.50

79,338.00
6,611.50
88,140.00
7,345.00

56

AFTER
54 MOS

STEP 6

76,878.00
6,406.50

80,754.00
6,729.50

83,304.00
6,942.00
92,514.00
7,709.50

AFTER
10 YRS

STEP 7

79,572.00
6,631.50

83,538.00
6,961.50
86,082.00
7,173.50
95,580.00
7,965.00

AFTER
15 YRS

STEP 8

82,338.00
6,861.50

86,454.00
7,204.50
89,118.00
7,426.50
98,580.00
8,215.00

AFTER
20 YRS

STEP 9

85,380.00
7,115.00

89,676.00
7,473.00
92,352.00
7,696.00
101,754.00
8,479.50

AFTER
25 YRS

STEP 10

87,852.00
7,321.00

92,352.00
7,696.00
95,058.00
7,921.50
105,036.00
8,753.00
2% INCREASE EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

GRADE
1 ANNUAL
MONTHLY
2 ANNUAL
MONTHLY

2A ANNUAL

MONTHLY
3 ANNUAL
MONTHLY

FIRST
12 MOS
STEP 1

44,850.00
3,737.50
64,014.00

5,334.50

66,210.00

5,517.50
73,938.00
6,161.50

AFTER
12 MOS
STEP 2

64,014.00

5,334.50

67,644.00

5,637.00

69,972.00

5,831.00
77,604.00
6,467.00

AFTER
18 MOS
STEP 3

67,644.00

5,637.00

71,148.00

5,929.00

73,506.00

6,125.50
81,558.00
6,796.50

APPENDIX A
SALARY SCHEDULE FOR SWORN POLICE PERSONNEL - 2012-2017

AFTER
30 MOS
STEP 4

71,148.00
5,929.00

74,646.00
6,220.50

77,076.00

6,423.00
85,698.00
7,141.50

57

AFTER

42 MOS

STEP 5
74,646.00
6,220.50
78,414.00

6,534.50
80,922.00

6,743.50
89,904.00
7,492.00

AFTER

54 MOS

STEP 6
78,414.00
6,534.50
82,368.00

6,864.00

84,972.00

7,081.00
94,362.00
7,863.50

AFTER
10 YRS
STEP7

81,162.00

6,763.50

85,206.00

7,100.50

87,804.00

7,317.00
97,494.00
8,124.50

AFTER
15 YRS
STEP 8

83,982.00

6,998.50

88,182.00

7,348.50

90,900.00

7,575.00
100,554.00
8,379.50

AFTER
20 YRS
STEP 9

87,090.00

7,257.50

91,470.00

7,622.50

94,200.00

7,850.00
103,788.00
8,649.00

AFTER
25 YEARS
STEP 10
89,610
7,467.50
94,200

7,850.00

96,960

8,080.00
107,136.00
8,928.00
2% INCREASE EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2014

GRADE

1 ANNUAL
MONTHLY

2 ANNUAL

MONTHLY

2A ANNUAL
MONTHLY

3 ANNUAL

MONTHLY

FIRST
12 MOS
STEP 1

45,750.00
3,812.50
65,292.00

5,441.00

67,536.00
5,628.00

75,414.00

6,284.50

AFTER
12 MOS
STEP 2

65,292.00
5,441.00
68,994.00

5,749.50

71,370.00
5,947.50

79,158.00

6,596.50

AFTER
18 MOS
STEP 3

68,994.00
5,749.50
72,570.00

6,047.50

74,976.00
6,248.00

83,190.00

6,932.50

APPENDIX A
SALARY SCHEDULE FOR SWORN POLICE PERSONNEL - 2012-2017

AFTER
30 MOS
STEP 4

72,570.00
6,047.50

76,140.00

6,345.00

78,618.00
6,551.50

87,414.00

7,284.50

58

AFTER
42 MOS
STEP 5

76,140.00
6,345.00
79,980.00

6,665.00

82,542.00
6,878.50

91,704.00

7,642.00

AFTER
54 MOS
STEP 6

79,980.00
6,665.00
84,018.00

7,001.50

86,670.00
7,222.50

96,252.00

8,021.00

AFTER
10 YRS
STEP7

82,788.00
6,899.00
86,910.00

7,242.50

89,562.00
7,463.50

99,444.00

8,287.00

AFTER
15 YRS
STEP 8

85,662.00
7,138.50
89,946.00

7,495.50

92,718.00
7,726.50

102,564.00

8,547.00

AFTER
20 YRS
STEP 9

88,830.00
7,402.50
93,300.00

7,775.00

96,084.00
8,007.00

105,864.00
8,822.00

AFTER
25 YRS
STEP 10

91,404.00
7,617.00
96,084.00

8,007.00

98,898.00
8,241.50

109,278.00

9,106.50
1.0% INCREASE EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2015 (Officers with Seniority Dates Earlier Than January 1, 1975, See Page 63)

1

2

2A

GRADE
ANNUAL
MONTHLY

ANNUAL
MONTHLY

ANNUAL
MONTHLY

ANNUAL
MONTHLY

SALARY SCHEDULE FOR SWORN POLICE PERSONNEL - 2012-2017

FIRST
12MOS
STEP 1

46,206.00
3,850.50

65,946.00
5,495.50

68,214.00
5,684.50

76,170.00
6,347.50

AFTER
12 MOS
STEP 2

65,946.00
5,495.50
69,684.00
5,807.00

72,084.00
6,007.00

79,950.00
6,662.50

AFTER
18 MOS
STEP 3

69,684.00
5,807.00

73,296.00
6,108.00

75,726.00
6,310.50

84,024.00
7,002.00

AFTER
30 MOS
STEP 4

73,296.00
6,108.00

76,902.00
6,408.50

79,404.00
6,617.00

88,290.00
7,357.50

59

AFTER
42 MOS
STEP 5

76,902.00
6,408.50

80,778.00
6,731.50

83,370.00
6,947.50

92,622.00
7,718.50

AFTER
54 MOS
STEP 6

80,778.00
6,731.50
84,858.00
7,071.50

87,534.00
7,294.50

97,212.00
8,101.00

AFTER
10 YRS
STEP7

83,616.00 86,520.00

6,968.00

87,780.00 90,846.00

7,315.00

90,456.00 93,648.00

7,538.00

100,440.00 103,590.00

8,370.00

AFTER
15 YRS
STEP 8

7,210.00

7,570.50

7,804.00

8,632.50

AFTER
20 YRS
STEP 9

89,718.00
7,476.50
94,236.00
7,853.00

97,044.00
8,087.00

106,920.00
8,910.00

AFTER
25 YRS
STEP 10

92,316.00
7,693.00

97,044.00
8,087.00

99,888.00
8,324.00

110,370.00
9,197.50
1% INCREASE EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2016

1

2A

GRADE
ANNUAL
MONTHLY
ANNUAL
MONTHLY
ANNUAL
MONTHLY
ANNUAL
MONTHLY

SALARY SCHEDULE FOR SWORN POLICE PERSONNEL - 2012-2017

FIRST
12 MOS

STEP 1
46,668.00
3,889.00
66,606.00
5,550.50
68,898.00
5,741.50
76,932.00
6,411.00

AFTER
12 MOS

STEP 2
66,606.00
5,550.50
70,380.00
5,865.00
72,804.00
6,067.00
80,748.00
6,729.00

AFTER
18 MOS

STEP 3
70,380.00
5,865.00
74,028.00
6,169.00
76,482.00
6,373.00
84,864.00
7,072.00

AFTER
30 MOS

STEP 4
74,028.00
6,169.00
77,670.00
6,472.50
80,196.00
6,683.00
89,172.00
7,431.00

60

AFTER
42 MOS

STEP 5
77,670.00
6,472.50
81,588.00
6,799.00
84,204.00
7,017.00
93,546.00
7,795.50

AFTER
54 MOS

STEP 6
81,588.00
6,799.00
85,704.00
7,142.00
88,410.00
7,367.50
98,184.00
8,182.00

AFTER
10 YRS

STEP 7
84,450.00
7,037.50
88,656.00
7,388.00
91,362.00
7,613.50
101,442.00
8,453.50

AFTER AFTER
15 YRS 20 YRS

STEP 8 STEP 9
87,384.00 90,618.00
7,282.00 7,551.50
91,752.00 95,178.00
7,646.00 7,931.50
94,584.00 98,016.00
7,882.00 8,168.00
104,628.00 107,988.00
8,719.00 8,999.00

AFTER
25 YRS

STEP 10
93,240.00
7,770.00
98,016.00
8,168.00
100,884.00
8,407.00
111,474.00
9,289.50
SALARY SCHEDULE FOR SWORN POLICE PERSONNEL — 2012-2017
2% INCREASE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2016

FIRST
12 MOS

GRADE STEP 1
1 ANNUAL —_ 47,604.00

MONTHLY 3,967.00

2 ANNUAL. 67,938.00
MONTHLY 5,661.50

2A ANNUAL 70,278.00
MONTHLY 5,856.50

3 ANNUAL. 78,468.00
MONTHLY 6,539.00

AFTER
12 MOS

STEP 2

67,938.00
5,661.50

71,790.00
5,982.50

74,262.00
6,188.50

82,362.00
6,863.50

AFTER
18 MOS

STEP 3

71,790.00
5,982.50

75,510.00
6,292.50

78,012.00
6,501.00

86,562.00
7,213.50

AFTER
30 MOS

STEP 4

75,510.00
6,292.50

79,224.00
6,602.00

81,798.00
6,816.50

90,954.00
7,579.50

61

AFTER
42 MOS

STEP 5

79,224.00
6,602.00

83,220.00
6,935.00

85,890.00
7,157.50

95,418.00
7,951.50

AFTER
54 MOS

STEP 6

83,220.00
6,935.00

87,420.00
7,285.00

90,180.00
7,515.00

100,146.00
8,345.50

AFTER
10 YRS

STEP7

86,142.00
7,178.50

90,432.00
7,536.00

93,192.00
7,766.00

103,470.00
8,622.50

AFTER
15 YRS

STEP 8

89,130.00
7,427.50

93,558.00
7,799.00

96,474.00
8,039.50

106,722.00
8,893.50

AFTER
20 YRS

STEP 9

92,430.00
7,702.50

97,080.00
8,090.00

99,978.00
8,331.50

110,148.00
9,179.00

AFTER
25 YRS

STEP 10

95,106.00
7,925.50

99,978.00
8,331.50

102,900.00

8,575.00

113,706.00
9,475.50
SALARY SCHEDULE FOR SWORN POLICE PERSONNEL 2012 - 2017

SCHEDULE D
ENTRANCE
RATE
STEP 1
CLASS FIRST 12
GRADE MONTHS,
1 ANNUAL 48,078.00
MONTHLY 4,006.50
2 ANNUAL 68,616.00
MONTHLY 5,718.00
2a ANNUAL 70,980.00
MONTHLY 5,915.00
3 ANNUAL 79,254.00
MONTHLY 6,604.50

STEP 2

AFTER 12
MONTHS,

68,616.00
5,718.00
72,510.00
6,042.50
75,006.00
6,250.50
83,184.00
6,932.00

STEP 3

AFTER 18
MONTHS

72,510.00
6,042.50
76,266.00
6,355.50
78,792.00
6,566.00
87,426.00
7,285.50

STEP 4

AFTER 30
MONTHS,

76,266.00
6,355.50
80,016.00
6,668.00
82,614.00
6,884.50
91,866.00
7,655.50

STEP 5

AFTER 42
MONTHS

80,016.00
6,668.00
84,054.00
7,004.50
86,748.00
7,229.00
96,372.00
8,031.00

62

STEP 6

AFTER 54
MONTHS,

84,054.00
7,004.50
88,296.00
7,358.00
91,080.00
7,590.00
101,148.00
8,429.00

STEP7

AFTER
10 YRS
OF
SERVICE

87,006.00
7,250.50
91,338.00
7,611.50
94,122.00
7,843.50
104,502.00
8,708.50

STEP 8

AFTER
15 YRS
OF
SERVICE

90,024.00
7,502.00
94,524.00
7,877.00
97,440.00
8,120.00
107,790.00
8,982.50

January 1, 2017
MAXIMUM
RATE

STEP 9 STEP 10

AFTER AFTER

20 YRS 25 YRS

OF SERVICE OF SERVICE

93,354.00 96,060.00
7,779.50 8,005.00
98,052.00 100,980.00
8,171.00 8,415.00
100,980.00 103,932.00
8,415.00 8,661.00
111,252.00 114,846.00
9,271.00 9,570.50
APPENDIX A

SALARY SCHEDULE FOR OFFICERS
ON STEP 11 PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2006

Officers on Step 11 prior to January 1, 2006 will remain on "Step 11" until they
leave the Department (i.e., retire, quit, die or are discharged). Officers on Step 11
prior to January 1, 2006 shall receive a two percent (2%) wage increase effective
July 1, 2012, a two percent (2%) wage increase effective January 1, 2013, a two
percent (2%) wage increase effective January 1, 2014, a one percent (1%) wage
increase effective January 1, 2015, a one percent (1%) wage increase effective
January 1, 2016, a two percent (2%) wage increase effective July 1, 2016, and a
one percent (1%) wage increase effective January 1, 2017 (and any base wage
increases which may be subsequently negotiated) as follows:

Schedule For Officers on Step 11 Prior to 1 JAN 2006

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pay Grade D-1 D-2 D-2A D-3
2% 1 Jul 12 ANNUAL 90,924.00 95,580.000 98,370.00 108,192.00
Per Month 7,577.00 7,965.00 8,197.50 9,016.00
2% 1 Jan 13 ANNUAL 92,742.00 97,494.00 100,338.00 110,358.00
Per Month 7,728.50 8,124.50 8,361.50 9,196.50
2% 1 Jan 14 ANNUAL 94,596.00 99,444.00 102,342.00 112,566.00
Per Month 7,883.00 8,287.00 8,528.50 9,380.50
1% 1 Jan 15 ANNUAL 95,544.00 100,440.00 103,368.00 113,694.00
Per Month 7,962.00 8,370.00 8,614.00 9,474.50
1% 1 Jan 16 ANNUAL 96,498.00 101,442.00 104,400.00 114,828.00
Per Month 8,041.50 8,453.50 8,700.00 9,569.00
2% 1 Jul 16 ANNUAL 98,430.00 103,470.00 106,488.00 117,126.00
Per Month 8,202.50 8,622.50 8,874.00 9,760.50
1% 1 Jan 17 ANNUAL 99,414.00 104,502.00 107,550.00 118,296.00
Per Month 8,284.50 8,708.50 8,962.50 9,858.00

No additional officers will enter onto Step 11 after December 31, 2005. Officers who
are not on Step 11 as of January 1, 2006 will achieve their maximum salary rate at
twenty-five (25) years of service - on Step 10.

63
APPENDIX B
Timekeeper
Citation Clerk

Clerk (Office Clerical — performing such duties as secretarial, filing, preparing
routine periodic reports, etc.)

Review Officer

Crossing Guard Supervisor

Radio Equipment Officer

Assembly Room Officer

Summary Case Management Officer — Traffic Division
Remote Terminal Officer

Motor Maintenance Supervisor

Lockup Keeper

Activity Officer

Motor Maintenance-Service Writers

Communications and Operations Section (including dispatchers and call-back
personnel)

Auto Pound Supervisor

Police Officers working in the Crime Lab (excluding Mobile Unit)
Extradition Warrant Officers

Evidence and Recovered Property Officers

Abandoned Vehicle Officer

Police Officers working in Youth Division Administration — Missing Persons
Section — performing Inquiry Aide/Clerical duty

64
APPENDIX C
AUXILIARY POLICE AIDES
The following are duties which may be performed by Auxiliary Police Aides:
Prepare case reports of non-criminal incidents as directed by a sworn Officer.
Answer telephone inquiries and make appropriate referrals.

Provide information to members of the public.

A

B.

Cc

D. Process Department reports and forms as directed by management.

E. Aid in traffic direction and control.

F. Run errands, and/or act as messengers.

G. Assist in:

1. crowd control at parades, athletic events and other public gatherings where
potential for violence is minimal.

2. times of disaster, disorder or emergency as directed by the Superintendent
of Police.

3. the operation of the Youth Fingerprint, Law Enforcement Explorer and
Junior Police programs, under the direction of program personnel.

H. Assist district neighborhood relations program personnel.
I. Provide clerical assistance to court sergeants.

J. Perform other administrative duties as determined by the unit commanding
officer.

65
APPENDIX D
DENTAL PLAN

The Employer shall make dental coverage available to Officers covered under
this Agreement and their eligible dependents. The cost of this coverage will be
borne by the Employer, subject to applicable Officer co-insurance, deductibles,
and co-payments. Officers will have the opportunity to choose between the
Dental PPO Plan and the Dental HMO Plan. Under the Dental PPO Plan
participants can use the dentist of their choice for services, but if they choose a
dentist in the PPO network the benefit will be higher. If they choose an out-of-
network dentist, the benefit will be lower. The Dental HMO Plan requires the
member to select a participating network dentist. All family members must use
the same Dental HMO dentist for their Dental services. Orthodontia is only
available in the Dental HMO Plan. Lists of Dental PPO and Dental HMO dentists
are available at the Benefits Management Office (312-747-8660).

66
APPENDIX E

NETWORK CHANGES

No change, modification or alteration in the composition of the hospital network in
effect at the time this Agreement is executed (a list of which is attached) shall be
made except in compliance with the following:

1. Lodge 7 FOP shall be notified in writing of the intent to change at least ninety
(90) days prior to the proposed change where circumstances are within the
City's control. In all other cases, the City will provide the maximum notice as
is practicable under the circumstances.

2. The notice referred to shall, at the time the notice is given, provide sufficient
information to explain the contemplated action and shall include, at a
minimum, but shall not be limited to:

The affected institutions.
The precise reason(s) the action is being contemplated.

c. The numbers of covered participants (employee and/or dependents)
receiving in-patient service from such affected facility at the time the
notice is given.

d. The number of covered participants (employees and/or dependents)
receiving in-patient service from such affected facility during the
preceding twelve (12) months.

3. The City shall meet within seven (7) calendar days of a request from the Lodge
to discuss the proposed change, shall provide all additional relevant
information which is reasonably available, and shall be responsible for such
notices to participants as may be reasonably demanded by the Lodge. In the
event the parties are unable to resolve a dispute within seven (7) calendar days
of the first meeting or such other time as may be mutually agreed upon, the
dispute shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to Section 9.5, Step 3 within
ten (10) days, and both parties shall cooperate to expedite the proceedings.

 

No change, modification or alteration covered by this Appendix shall be made or
permitted for arbitrary or discriminatory reasons; nor shall any change, modification
or alteration result in the unavailability of quality health care services in a specific
geographic area.

67
APPENDIX F
IN-NETWORK/OUT-OF-NETWORK CARE

In-network co-insurance benefits shall be paid to eligible participants for the
following out-of-network care or services:

A. Emergencies defined as the sudden and unexpected onset of a medical
condition with such severe symptoms that the absence of immediate medical
attention could result in serious and permanent medical consequences.

B. Care ordered by a physician which, after review by the Utilization Review

vendor, is:

1. medically necessary; and

2. only available at a non-network hospital, or the proposed treatment is
erformed so infrequently in-network that direction to non-network
ospital is medically appropriate; or
3. available at a network hospital to which the patient cannot be safely
transported (only until such time as the patient can be safely transferred to
the network facility, arrangements for which should be initiated once the
treatment plan has begun), provided the cost of the transfer shall be paid
y the plan; or
4. care rendered beyond a 50-mile radius (from any network hospital) where
articipant is domiciled or stationed.

 

This information is also contained in the Employee Benefit Handbook.

68
APPENDIX G
HEALTH CARE CONTRIBUTIONS
FOR ACTIVE OFFICERS

Effective July 1, 2006, active Officers covered by this Agreement will contribute
the following percentages of their base salary from the appropriate Salary Schedule
in Appendix A towards the cost of their health care:

Single Coverage: 1.2921%
Employee +1: 1.9854%
Family Coverage: 2.4765 %

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For example, contributions at selected salary levels per pay period will be as

follows:
ANNUAL SINGLE EMP + 1 FAMILY
SALARY 1.2921% 1.9854% 2.4765%
$15,000 $8.08 $12.41 $15.48
$20,000 $10.77 $16.55 $20.64
$30,000 $16.15 $24.82 $30.96
$40,000 $21.54 $33.09 $41.28
$50,000 $26.92 $41.36 $51.59
$60,000 $32.30 $49.64 $61.91
$70,000 $37.69 $57.91 $72.23
$80,000 $43.07 $66.18 $82.55
$90,000 + $48.45 $74.45 $92.87

 

 

 

 

 

 

69
APPENDIX H
PRESCRIPTION DRUG COSTS

The following are the co-payments and effective dates for the lesser of a 30-day
supply or 100 units of the following prescription drugs:

 

 

 

 

 

TYPE Effective July 1, 2006

Generic Tier 1 $10.00

Brand Formulary Tier 2 $30.00

Brand Non-Formulary Tier 3_ $45.00

Brand with Generic Equivalent Generic Co-Payment Plus Cost Difference
Between Brand and Generic

 

 

 

 

MAIL ORDER DRUGS

Effective July 1, 2006, co-payments for prescriptions obtained through the mail order
plan for all health care plans are as follows (per prescription; 90 day supply):

(1) Generic Tier 1: $20.00
(2) Brand Formulary Tier 2: $60.00
(3) Brand Non-Formulary Tier 3: Not available

(4) Brand with Generic Equivalent: Generic Co-Payment Plus Cost Difference
Between Brand and Generic

70
APPENDIX I

CHEMICAL DEPENDENCY AND MENTAL HEALTH
CO-INSURANCE AND LIMITS

Courses of treatment for inpatient chemical dependency and mental health shall
include the continuum of care used to treat a particular diagnosis. A new course of
treatment will be considered when there is a 30-day or longer period of time with no
treatment or clinical supervision provided.

PPO In-Patient Care

Co-Insurance: City Employee
In-Network 90% 10%
Out of Network 60% 40%

PPO Outpatient Care:

80% of $100 Max Covered Expenses per Session;
Limit of Seven Sessions Covered if Treatment Is Not Certified

Maximum Covered Expenses per Year: $5,000

HMO Co-Payments for Mental Health or Substance Abuse Care:
Effective January 1, 2006: $15.00 Co-Payment
Effective January 1, 2007: $20.00 Co-Payment

HMO Service Limitations:
In-Patient Care: Max of 30 Days per Year
Out-Patient Care: Max of 30 Visits per Year

It is understood that all in-network treatments are subject to the in-network out-of-
pocket maximum. All out-of-network treatments are subject to the out-of-
network out-of-pocket maximum, pursuant to the existing methodology for
charging expenditures to the out-of-pocket maximum for out-of-network
treatment. All CD/MH treatment including out-patient may be subject to
Utilization Review.

All chemical dependency and mental health treatment is subject to review by the
utilization review program. Additionally, to be considered under the chemical
dependency/mental health benefit structure, a claim for benefits must include a
primary DSM-III-R (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders—Third
Edition—Revised) diagnosis (or diagnosis under a subsequent revision).

71
L

APPENDIX J

BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTION SYSTEM —
PERSONNEL CONCERNS PROGRAM

Hearings will be allowed for both the Behavioral Intervention System (BIS)
and the Personnel Concerns (PC) Program.

A.

The hearing is voluntary and must be requested by the affected Department
member.

1. In the instance of the Behavioral Intervention System, a hearing must
be requested within seven (7) working days of being presented with
the Individualized Performance Plan (IPP) and the Behavioral
Intervention System Counseling Record. The request for a hearing
must be in writing to the Director of the Personnel Division.

2. In the instance of the Personnel Concerns Program, a hearing must be
requested within seven (7) working days of having attended a
Personnel Concerns Conference. The request for a hearing must be in
writing to the Director of the Personnel Division.

NOTE: Department members upgraded from the Behavioral
Intervention System to the Personnel Concerns Program are
not entitled to a hearing.

The Department will set the hearing date and notify the affected
Department member of the date.

The hearing time will be as close as possible to the Officer's regular duty
hours (i.e., morning for Ist watch Officers, afternoon for 3rd watch
Officers) and will not be on the Officer's furlough, Regular Day Off, or
previously planned day off (i.e. Baby Furlough Day, Personal Day, etc.)
unless the Officer agrees to such. Overtime will not be granted for the
hearing.

II. Hearing Procedures.

Ii.

A.

moa

The Department will explain its position for enrollment of the member in
the Behavioral Intervention System or Personnel Concerns Program.

The Officer, or his or her representative, will present the Officer's position.
The Department representative may ask the Officer questions.
The Officer's representative may question the Officer.

The Department representative will, within five (5) working days, notify
the Officer of his or her decision and that decision is final.

Placement Duration (Behavioral Intervention System/Personnel Concerns
Program).

Placement in either program is for one (1) year.

NOTE: Placement in either program may be extended past the initial year or, in

the instance of the Behavioral Intervention System, be upgraded to the
Personnel Concerns Program. Additionally, a member may be
removed from either program prior to a year being completed.

72
Any member who is upgraded from the Behavioral Intervention System
to the Personnel Concerns Program will be informed at the Personnel
Concerns Conference that he or she may forward a To/From subject
report to the Commander of the Personnel Division outlining the reasons
the member feels this upgrade should not take place. In addition, any
Officer who extends past one (1) year in the Behavioral Intervention
System or the Personnel Concerns Program may submit a To/From
outlining the reasons he or she believes that they should not be retained
in the program.

73
APPENDIX K

HIGH RISK PREGNANCY
SCREENING PROGRAM

In order to reduce the risk of a premature birth and the attendant health risks to
mother and child and to avoid the costs associated with same, the City offers a high
risk pregnancy screening program. The program is part of the medical advisor
program.

Under the program, a pregnant employee, spouse or dependent is encouraged to
notify the medical advisor during the first trimester of pregnancy. During the
telephone interview, the nurse reviewers will collect information on the health status
of the prospective mother, her medical history, and conduct a health risk assessment
to determine if she meets criteria for a high risk pregnancy.

If the prospective mother does not meet criteria, the medical advisor would offer
educational materials on pregnancy and advise her that they will be following up
with a call in her second trimester of pregnancy. Further, they will advise her that
they are available if she has any questions about her pregnancy. Subsequent follow
up will depend on the course of the pregnancy. As delivery approaches, they will
advise her about expected lengths of stay postpartum.

If the prospective mother meets criteria for a high risk pregnancy, the medical
advisor will contact her physician to discuss the risk factors and identify what steps,
if any, are appropriate to reduce the risk of early delivery. They will follow the case
as appropriate. If home health or other services available under the plan are
necessary, they will approve the care plan and negotiate discounts for approved
services. They will be available as a resource to both the prospective mother and her
physician.

 

74
APPENDIX L
AFFIDAVITS IN DISCIPLINARY INVESTIGATIONS

. No affidavit will be required in support of anonymous complaints of criminal
conduct. IPRA and IAD shall continue the current and past practice with
respect to classifying allegations as either criminal or excessive force.
Allegations of excessive force shall not be classified as criminal for purposes of
avoiding the affidavit requirement.

. Anonymous complaints of Medical Roll Abuse and/or Residency violations
will not be made the subject of a Complaint Register (CR) investigation until
verified, consistent with the current procedure. If the anonymous complaint has
been verified, no affidavit will be required.

. Where a supervisor receives an allegation of misconduct from a citizen, the
supervisor will not be required to sign an affidavit.

. Where one Department member makes an allegation of misconduct against
another Department member, neither Department member will be required to
sign an affidavit because both Department members are subject to discipline for
making a false report under the Rule 14 of the Department's Rules and
Regulations.

. A complaint which is supported by an affidavit will not require additional
affidavits in support of additional allegations within the same complaint.

In all other cases, IPRA and IAD will make a good faith effort to obtain an
appropriate affidavit from the complainant within a reasonable time. An
"appropriate affidavit" in the case of a citizen complainant is one where the
complainant affirms under oath that the allegation(s) and statement(s) made by
the complainant are true.

. When an appropriate affidavit cannot be obtained from a citizen complainant,
the head of either IPRA or IAD may sign an appropriate affidavit according to
the following procedure. An "appropriate affidavit" in the case of the head of
either IPRA or IAD is an affidavit wherein the agency head states he or she has
reviewed objective verifiable evidence of the type listed below, the affidavit
will specify what evidence has been reviewed and in reliance upon that
evidence, the agency head affirms that it is necessary and appropriate for the
investigation to continue.

. The types of evidence the agency head must review and may rely upon will be
dependent on the type of case, but may include arrest and case reports, medical
records, statements of witnesses and complainants, video or audio tapes, and
photographs. This list is illustrative only and is not to be considered exclusive
or exhaustive.

 

. In the case of an investigation of the type normally conducted by IPRA, the

head of IAD will execute the affidavit described above, if the head of IAD
believes execution of the required affidavit is appropriate under the facts of the
case based upon the evidence received at that time. In the case of an
investigation of the type normally conducted by IAD, the head of IPRA will
execute the affidavit described above if the head of IPRA believes the

75
10.

11.

required affidavit is appropriate under the facts of the case based upon the
evidence received at that time.

No Officer will be required to answer any allegation of misconduct unless it is
supported by an appropriate affidavit, except as specified in paragraphs one
through five above. In the event that no affidavit is received within a reasonable
time, the investigation will be terminated and no record of the complaint or
investigation will appear on the Officer's Disciplinary History.

Upon the receipt of a complaint which requires an affidavit, IPRA or IAD may
conduct a preliminary investigation into those allegations but no Complaint
Register (CR) number will be issued unless and until the required affidavit is
obtained.

716
APPENDIX M
EXPEDITED ARBITRATION RULES

The following provisions shall be applicable to those arbitrations where the
parties have agreed to expedited arbitration pursuant to Section 9.3.B.
Nothing herein prevents the parties from adding to, deleting or modifying
these provisions by mutual agreement.

A.

B.

a

Arbitrators will receive all grievance documents at least one week prior to the
hearing, at the discretion of the Arbitrator.

Arbitrators will be permitted to issue subpoenas in accordance with applicable
law. Subpoenas shall not be used for purposes of delay.

The expenses of witnesses for either side shall be paid by the party producing
such witnesses.

  

Hearings will be scheduled alternately at City and Lodge locations.

Except where mutually agreed otherwise by the parties, each party will
represent itself at the hearing, and may designate any representative who is not
an attorney.

The hearings shall be informal. The Arbitrator shall assist the parties in
ensuring that there is a complete record.

The Arbitrator may require witnesses to testify under oath.
There shall be no stenographic record of the proceedings.

The rules of evidence normally followed in arbitration proceedings shall apply.
The Arbitrator shall be the sole judge of the relevance and materiality of the
evidence offered.

The parties will not file post-hearing briefs. The parties may argue orally on the
record and may present relevant authorities to the Arbitrator at the hearing,
except that any decisions rendered in the expedited proceedings under these
rules may not be cited to the Arbitrator.

. The Arbitrator will issue a short, written decision no later than sixty (60) days

after the completion of the last day of any scheduled block of hearings. His or
her decision shall be based upon the record developed by the parties before
and at the hearing, and shall include a brief written explanation of the basis
for his or her conclusion and shall include reference to the evidence
considered and the role that evidence played in reaching his or her decision.

If the parties mutually agree, the Arbitrator presiding over the expedited
arbitration held pursuant to this Appendix M shall be selected from the
panel provided for in Appendix Q, applicable to arbitration of suspension
grievances pursuant to Section 9.6.B. In the absence of mutual agreement to
utilize the panel, the parties shall select the Arbitrator pursuant to the
process set forth in Section 9.3.A.

77
APPENDIX N
PROCEDURES FOR INJURY ON DUTY AND RECURRENCE CLAIMS

An Officer who has been certified as injured on duty shall be provided a list of available
physicians for treatment. The list of available physicians shall indicate the physicians’ medical
specialties and the physicians shall be members in good standing of a network of worker’
compensation physicians qualified to render appropriate medical care for the injury claimed. The
Officer will select a physician from the list provided by the Employer. The Medical Services
Section will refer the Officer to the physician selected by the Officer.

An Officer claiming a recurrence of an injury on duty will have his or her claim
evaluated by a physician from the Medical Services Section. A claim of a
recurrence of an injury on duty includes a claim by an Officer that an injury,
illness or condition is related to an injury on duty,

If the Medical Services Section physician finds the injury, illness or condition
complained of is not a recurrence of or related to an injury on duty, the Medical
Services Section will provide the Officer with the list of physicians described above.
The Officer will select a physician from the list provided by the Medical Services
Section and the Medical Services Section will refer the Officer to the physician
selected by the Officer (Referral Physician).

The parties may accept the Referral Physician’s finding, which shall be final and
binding on both the Officer and the Employer, or either party may seek an
Independent Medical Examination (IME). The physician conducting the IME (IME
Referral Physician) shall be certified in the appropriate medical specialty(ies) and
shall be selected by the Officer from a list of physicians provided by the Employer,
which shall indicate the physicians’ certified medical specialty(ies), who are
members in good standing of a network of physicians qualified to render IMEs. The
Medical Services Section will refer the Officer to the IME Referral Physician
selected by the Officer for an examination. The IME Referral Physician shall
consider all documents and medical records considered by the Referral Physician as
well as the Referral Physician’s finding. The IME Referral Physician’s finding
shall specify the reasons for the finding and shall be supported by the evidence in
the documents and medical records. The finding of the IME Referral Physician
shall be final and binding on both the Officer and the Employer.

The following shall apply if the Medical Services Section finds that the injury,
illness or condition complained of is not a recurrence of or related to an injury on
duty and it is later determined, pursuant to the process described above, that the
injury, illness or condition complained of is a recurrence of or related to an injury
on duty. Under these circumstances, the twelve (12) month period of time for which
an Officer receives full pay and benefits as set forth in Section 18.1 shall be
extended and the Officer shall receive, in addition to the twelve (12) month period
of time set forth in Section 18.1, full pay and benefits from the date the Medical
Services Section initially found that the injury, illness or condition complained of
was not a recurrence of or related to an injury on duty through the date it is later

78
certified by the Medical Services Section that the injury, illness or condition
complained of is a recurrence of or related to an injury on duty.

79
APPENDIX O
SUBROGATION LANGUAGE FOR CITY OF CHICAGO

In the event the Plan provides benefits for injury, illness, medical care or other loss (the
"Injury") to any person, the Plan is subrogated to all present and future rights of recovery that
person, his or her parents, heirs, guardians, executors, or other representatives (individually and
collectively called the "Participant") may have arising out of the Injury. The Plan's subrogation
rights include, without limitation, all rights of recovery a Participant has: 1) against any person,
insurance company or other entity that is in any way responsible for providing or does provide
damages, compensation, indemnification or benefits for the Injury; 2) under any law or policy
of insurance or accident benefit plan providing No Fault, Personal Injury Protection or financial
responsibility insurance; 3) under uninsured or underinsured motorist insurance; 4) under motor
vehicle medical reimbursement insurance; and, 5) under specific risk or group accident and
health coverage or insurance, including, without limitation, premises or homeowners medical
reimbursement, athletic team, school or workers compensation coverages or insurance.

 

 

Upon notice of an Injury claim, the Plan may assert a subrogation lien to the extent it has
provided, or may be required to provide, Injury-related benefits. Notice of either the Plan's right
of subrogation or the Plan's subrogation lien is sufficient to establish the Plan's rights of
subrogation and entitlement to reimbursement from insurers, third parties, or other persons or
entities against whom a Participant may have an Injury-related right of recovery. The Plan shall
be entitled to intervene in or institute legal action when necessary to protect its subrogation or
reimbursement rights.

The Participant and anyone acting on his or her behalf shall promptly provide the Plan or its
authorized agents with information it deems appropriate to protect its right of subrogation and
shall do nothing to prejudice that right and shall cooperate fully with the Plan in the
enforcement of its subrogation rights. Reasonable attorney's fees and costs of Participant's
attorney shall be paid first from any recovery by or on behalf of a Participant, and the amount
of the Plan's subrogation claim shall be paid next from such recovery. Neither a Participant nor
his or her attorney or other representative is authorized to accept subrogation or other Injury-
related reimbursement payments on behalf of the Plan, to negotiate or compromise the Plan's
subrogation claim, or to release any right of recovery prior to the payment of the Plan's
subrogation claim.

The Participant and all other parties to a recovery are required to contact the Plan to determine,
and arrange to pay the Plan's subrogation claim at or prior to the time an Injury-related payment
or settlement is made to or for the benefit of the Participant. If the Participant obtains a
payment or settlement from a party without the Plan's knowledge and agreement, the Plan shall
be entitled to immediate reimbursement of its total subrogation claim from the Participant or
any party providing any Injury-related payment. In the alternative, the Plan, in its sole
discretion, may deny payment of benefits to or on behalf of the Participant for any otherwise
covered claim incurred by the Participant until the amount of the unpaid coverage is equal to
and offset by the unrecovered amount of the Plan's subrogation claim.

80
The Plan Administrator or its authorized agents are vested with full and final
discretionary authority to construe subrogation and other Plan terms and to reduce
or compromise the amount of the Plan's recoverable interest where, in the sole
discretion of the Plan Administrator or its authorized agents, circumstances
warrant such action. The Plan shall not be responsible for any litigation-related
expenses or attorney fees incurred by or on behalf of a Participant in connection
with an Injury claim unless the Plan shall have specifically agreed in writing to
pay such expenses or fees.

The payment of benefits to or on behalf of the Participant is contingent on both the
Participant's full compliance with the Plan's provisions, including the subrogation
provision, and, when the Plan deems appropriate, the Participant's signing of a
reimbursement agreement. However, the Participant's failure to sign this
reimbursement agreement will not affect the Plan's subrogation rights or its right to
assert a lien against any source of possible recovery and to collect the amount of its
subrogation claim.

81
APPENDIX P

BENEFITS DURING PROBATIONARY PERIOD

In connection with the extension of the probationary period from a twelve (12)
month period to an eighteen (18) month period, the following rights, privileges
and benefits shall apply upon the completion of the first twelve (12) months of
the probationary period:

Article 3 -
Section 7.1 -
Article 8 -
Article 10 -
Article 11 -
Article 12 -
Article 18 -
Article 19 -
Article 20.1 -
Article 20.2 -
Article 20.3 -
Article 20.4 -
Article 20.5 -
Article 20.8 -
Article 20.11 -
Article 20.12 -
Article 21.3 -
Article 22 -
Article 24 -
Article 25 -
Article 26 -
Article 27 -
Article 29 -
Article 29.A. -
Article 30 -
Appendix A -
Appendix D -
Appendix E -
Appendix F -
Appendix G -

Lodge Security

Administration of Summary Punishment
Employee Security

Non-Discrimination

Holidays

Promotions

Disability Income

Bereavement Leave

Work Day and Work Week
Compensation for Overtime

Sixth and Seventh Day Work

Call-Back

Court Time

Stand-By

Accumulation of Compensatory Time
Back to Back Shifts on Change Day
Uniform Allowance

Indemnification

Educational Reimbursement

Life and Health Insurance Provisions
Wages

Residency

Baby Furlough Days

Furloughs

Personal Leaves of Absence

Salary Schedule for Sworn Police Personnel
Dental Plan

Network Changes
In-Network/Out-of-Network Care
Health Care Contributions for Active Officers

82
Appendix H - Prescription Drug Costs

Appendix I- | Chemical Dependency and Mental Health Co-Insurance &
Appendix K - Limits High Risk Pregnancy Screening Program Procedures
Appendix N - for Injury on Duty and Recurrence Claims Subrogation
Appendix O- Language for City of Chicago

LOU Regarding Retroactivity of Wage Increases to Retirees

LOU Regarding One-Half Hour Lunch Period

LOU Regarding Article 22 Indemnification

MOU Regarding Health Care Plan

LOU Regarding Health Care Plan/Election by Married Employees

Any dispute or difference between the parties concerning the interpretation and/ or
application of any of the above provisions shall be subject to the Grievance
Procedure of Article 9.

The parties further agree that an Officer who successfully completes his or her
probationary period after having been placed on LO.D. shall be entitled to the
benefits under the contract on the same basis as police Officers who were in that
Officer's class who did not have his or her probationary period extended.

 

 

Finally, the parties agree that in the event a probationary police officer during his
or her final six (6) months of the probation period and a non-probationary police
Officer are involved together in a situation which gives rise to the non-probationary
police Officer and the probationary police officer each receiving discipline of a five
(5) day suspension or less and the discipline for the non-probationary police
Officer is subsequently rescinded or reduced, any discipline imposed on the
probationary police officer may be reviewed in accordance with the collective
bargaining agreement and the City will not assert timeliness provided the Officer
has completed successfully his or her probationary period.

83
APPENDIX Q

GROUND RULES FOR ARBITRATION OF SUSPENSION
GRIEVANCES PURSUANT TO SECTION 9.6.B AND 9.6.C

The following procedures shall apply to arbitrations of grievances
challenging suspensions of eleven (11) to three hundred sixty-five (365) days.

A. The Lodge and the Employer have agreed to a panel of five (5)
Arbitrators who shall comprise the exclusive list of Arbitrators to preside
over the suspension grievances. The five (5) Arbitrators are: . Each
December the Lodge and the City shall each be permitted to strike one (1)
Arbitrator from the panel for any reason. In the event an Arbitrator is
removed from the panel, the parties shall attempt to agree upon a
replacement Arbitrator. If the parties are unable to agree upon a
replacement, they shall request a list of seven (7) Arbitrators from the
American Arbitration Association, each of whom must be a member of the
National Academy of Arbitrators. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the
list, the parties shall select an Arbitrator. Both the Employer and the Lodge
shall alternately strike names from the list. The remaining person shall be
the added to the panel. In the event the Lodge and the City each strike an
Arbitrator from the panel as part of the December process, and if the parties
are unable to agree upon replacement Arbitrators, the parties shall request
two lists from the American Arbitration Association to be used to select the
two replacement Arbitrators.

B. Within ten (10) days of the Lodge electing to forward the suspension
grievance to arbitration, the parties shall meet and select an Arbitrator from
the panel. The parties shall inform the Arbitrator of the Arbitrator’s
appointment and request a hearing date within sixty (60) days. If the
Arbitrator is unable to provide a hearing date within sixty (60) days from the
date of being contacted, the parties shall select another Arbitrator from the
panel who is able to provide a hearing date within sixty (60) days. Upon
appointment of the Arbitrator, but prior to the date on which a cancellation
fee would be incurred, and unless they have already done so, the parties shall
schedule a date to conduct a settlement conference to attempt to resolve the
grievance. More than one suspension grievance may be discussed at the
settlement conference. If the parties are unable to resolve the suspension
grievance, they shall proceed with the Arbitration Process outlined in this
Memorandum of Understanding.

Cc. Provided the Lodge accepts a hearing date within sixty (60) days of
appointment of the Arbitrator, the Officer will not be required to serve the
suspension, nor will the suspension be entered on the Officer’s disciplinary
record, until the Arbitrator rules on the merits of the grievance. In the event
additional day(s) of hearing may be required to resolve the grievance, such
additional day(s) shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days of the first day of
hearing. If the Lodge is not ready to proceed on a scheduled hearing date,

84
the Officer shall be required to serve the suspension prior to the Arbitrator
ruling on the merits of the grievance.

D. The authority and expenses of the Arbitrator shall be governed by the
provisions of Sections 9.7 and 9.8 of the Agreement.

E. The provisions of this Appendix Q supersede Appendix S of the
predecessor collective bargaining agreement. However, nothing shall
prohibit or require the parties agreeing upon an expedited or “fast track”
arbitration procedure for a specific grievance or category of grievances.

85
APPENDIX R

PROCEDURES FOR PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW

Any Officer covered by this Agreement who has been involuntarily removed from
active duty for psychological reasons has a right to file a grievance pursuant to
Section 9.4 of this Agreement. In order to achieve a fair and prompt resolution of
such a grievance, the Lodge and the Employer agree that these procedures will be
followed.

I. ISSUES FOR REVIEW

A. Is the Grievant presently psychologically fit to perform the duties of a full
duty police officer?

B. Was the Grievant psychologically capable of performing the duties of a
full duty police Officer at the time he or she was removed from duty or at
any time thereafter? If so, on what date?

The duties of a full duty police Officer shall include the ability to perform the duties
set forth in the following two paragraphs.

Police Officers, as part of and empowered by the community, protect the lives,
property, and rights of all people, maintain order, and enforce the law impartially.
They work in partnership with the community to respond to crime and
neighborhood disorder. They work various shifts and days as assigned, patrolling
an assigned beat by vehicle and/or on foot in order to observe conditions, intervene
in observed situations that require their attention, and provide a visible presence to
prevent crime from occurring. Police Officers respond to a variety of
such as crimes in progress, accidents, damage to property, and domest
disturbances. They may have to deal with unruly persons and overcome forceful
resistance. They protect crime scenes until detectives or superiors arrive; examine
the scene for evidence, and question suspects, victims, and witnesses in order to
gather information. Under Chicago's Alternative Policing Strategy (CAPS), Police
Officers participate in and conduct neighborhood meetings to identify community
concerns and work with supervisors and peers to analyze crime patterns and
develop responses to criminal activity in an area.

 
  

Police Officers respond to a variety of emergencies and must pursue suspects on
foot over a variety of terrain and obstacles. Police Officers prepare reports,
recording all details of an incident; prepare arrest slips to start the booking
procedure; and testify in court. Police Officers must possess the ability to
physically control suspects and to safely discharge firearms to protect citizens
and/or themselves. They perform a wide variety of other tasks, such as directing
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, issuing traffic citations, and assisting sick and
injured persons in a variety of ways. They perform all other related duties as
required and directed in order to serve citizens by enforcing laws and protecting
lives and property.

The Panel must find that an Officer is either fit or unfit for full duty as a Police
Officer. When an Officer is found fit for full duty, the Panel may recommend that

86
the Grievant participate in counseling. However, the Panel's recommendation may
not be conditioned upon such participation.

tl. INFORMATION AVAILABLE FOR REVIEW BY THE PANEL

A.

The Grievant must execute a release in proper legal form authorizing the
Lodge to have access to the Employer's psychological files. The term
"psychological files" does not include the results of any standardized
psychological/ psychiatric tests.

No documentation in the possession of any member of the Panel shall be
withheld if requested by another Panel member. Each member of the Panel
shall provide to the other members of the Panel the results of any standardized
psychological/psychiatric tests, conclusions based on said tests, and each Panel
member's rationale for finding the Grievant fit or unfit.

The mutually-appointed member of the Panel may interview, examine, and
evaluate the Grievant and may request additional data through the
representatives of the Lodge and the Employer. Any member of the Panel is
authorized to review any and all information or documents contained in
Complaint Register files that are open, not-sustained, and/or sustained.
However, no member of the Panel shall review any information or documents
in Complaint Register files in which the finding was exonerated or
unfounded. The restrictions on the retention of Complaint Register files set
forth in Section 8.4 of this Agreement shall also apply to the Psychological
Review process.

Il. PROCEDURES

A.

B.

All members of the Panel shall meet and discuss the Grievant's fitness and
reach a conclusion regarding fitness.

The mutually-appointed member of the Panel shall draft the Panel's decision
regarding the Grievant's fitness. The decision must specifically address
whether the Officer was fit for some or all of the time the Officer has been
removed from duty and the Officer's present fitness. The decision must also
address all of the issues submitted for review and state the evidence relied
upon as the basis for the decision.

The mutually-appointed member of the Panel shall send the draft of the Panel's
decision to the Panel members appointed by the Lodge and the Employer for
verification of their representations within fourteen (14) days from the date of
the meeting of the Panel. The members of the Panel appointed by the Lodge
and the Employer shall have fourteen (14) days from the postmark date of the
draft report to verify said representations and to provide suggestions,
recommendations, and comments to the mutually-appointed member of the
Panel. The mutually-appointed member of the Panel may make any revisions
to the decision based upon the comments received from the other members of
the Panel. The final decision shall issue no later than fourteen (14) days from
the postmark date of the latest response of the other members of the Panel, if
any. In all cases, the decision of the Panel shall issue no later than sixty (60)
days from the date of the meeting of the Panel. Failure to meet these time

87
guidelines does not divest the Panel of authority to make fitness for duty
decisions, nor expose the Employer to any liability.

Dz. Copies of the decision of the Panel shall be provided immediately to
the representatives of the Lodge and the Employer.

88
APPENDIX S
GRIEVANCE MEDIATION PROGRAM GROUND RULES

The parties agree to establish a grievance mediation program in accordance with the
following ground rules:

1) Grievance mediation sessions shall be scheduled by the parties by mutual agreement,
but not more frequently than once quarterly. Such mediation sessions shall be presided
over by an arbitrator/mediator, to be selected by mutual agreement of the parties from
among the following three (3) arbitrators/mediators: Edwin Benn, Peter Meyers and George
Roumell.

2) In order to be eligible for submission to this mediation pilot program, grievances
must be of the “contract interpretation” variety (i.e., neither disciplinary nor medical
grievances shall be eligible for this process), the Lodge must have invoked arbitration of the
grievance, and there are no issues with respect to the procedural arbitrability of the
grievance(s).

3) Each party shall identify up to four (4) grievances for presentation at each session
(i.e., a total of eight (8) grievances per session). The parties shall agree upon the agenda of
grievances to be submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to the mediation session, and
shall jointly prepare an agreed upon statement of the issue(s) presented in each grievance.

4) At least ten (10) days before the session, the parties shall confer for the purpose of
exchanging the documents upon which each intends to rely at the session, including copies of
any correspondence, orders, statements, etc. The parties are expected to resolve any
disputes regarding authenticity of any proposed documents or other exhibits prior to the
mediation session.

5) Within three (3) days of the session, each party shall prepare and exchange with the
other party a written statement, for each grievance, of no more than one (1) page in length,
outlining its position and arguments concerning the grievance. The governing principle in
this mediation process, to be adhered to by both parties, is that there be no claims or
defenses offered for the first time at the mediation.

6) A party’s failure to comply with any of the timelines set forth in this Appendix shall
result in the cancellation of the mediation session and assessment of the Mediator’s
cancellation fee and expenses against that party. Otherwise, the parties shall split evenly the
cost of the Mediator’s expenses and fees. Each party shall bear its own fees and expenses
related to the mediation.

7) Within three (3) days of the session, each party shall submit to the Mediator a set of
the documents previously provided to the other party. Only under extraordinary
circumstances will a party be allowed to introduce a document at the hearing that was not
previously identified and submitted. As part of the submission to the Mediator, each party
may submit the one (1) page written statement, for each grievance, referenced in paragraph
3 above, outlining its position concerning the grievance.

89
8) At the session, each party may be represented by one (1) attorney and one (1) party
representative. The grievant may also be present; if there are multiple grievants, then one
grievant representative may be present. Each party shall make a presentation of no more
than thirty (30) uninterrupted minutes in length (including rebuttal) with respect to each
grievance. There shall be no witnesses; however, if the mediator indicates that hearing from
the grievant would be helpful to the mediator, the grievant may make a statement. The
thirty (30) allowed minutes shall include the grievant’s statement. Each party shall
otherwise make its presentation through offer(s) of proof. The rules of evidence shall not
apply and there shall be no procedural or substantive legal objections to the parties’
presentations or to the evidence submitted at mediation (e.g., objections based on lack of
foundation). There shall be no recording of the session. The parties expect that the
Mediator will conduct the mediation by initially having both parties in the same room
making their initial presentation(s), and will thereafter separate the parties to conduct the
mediation, as the Mediator deems appropriate.

9) Each party’s representative(s) shall come to the session with authority to resolve each
grievance scheduled to be heard, and shall have authority to enter into a settlement
agreement. Where a settlement agreement is reached, the parties shall reduce to writing the
terms of the agreement and execute such agreement prior to the conclusion of the mediation
session.

10) Any settlement reached at mediation shall be binding with respect to that particular
grievance(s) only, and shall have no precedential value with respect to any other grievance,
nor may it may be used or referred to in any subsequent proceeding between the parties,
unless both parties agree in writing. The mediation session(s) shall be confidential, and
nothing said by either party at the session(s) may be used, referred to or relied upon in any
subsequent proceeding.

11) The Mediator shall not be eligible to serve as an arbitrator with respect to any
grievances submitted to the Mediator as part of the mediation pilot program.

12) The location of the mediation session shall rotate among the offices of the Lodge, the
Management and Labor Affairs Section or another location agreed to by the parties.

13) Upon mutual agreement, the parties may strike the name(s) of one or more of the
Mediators identified in Paragraph (1) above and, by agreement, substitute a different
Mediator to replace the stricken name(s).

14) _ Both parties acknowledge their shared interest in streamlining the

grievance/arbitration process and providing for timely and appropriate resolutions of
grievances.

90
APPENDIX T
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING

Pursuant to the award issued Jn the Matter of the Arbitration Between the City of Chicago and
Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago Lodge No. 7 by Arbitrator Edwin H. Benn on April 16, 2010,
the Chicago Police Department's drug and alcohol testing program shall be amended as follows:

A. The Department's existing policies and orders regarding random drug testing shall be revised
to include the following components:

1. Testing for the presence of alcohol while on duty.
Officers selected for random drug testing shall also be tested for alcohol.

Upon notification to submit to random testing, Officers shall continue to report to the
Random Drug Testing Unit for the collection of urine specimens.

c. The Department may use urine specimens to test for the presence of both drugs
specified in this agreement and alcohol. The Department may also test for alcohol
using a breath alcohol test administered by a qualified tester using a certified and
calibrated Breathalyzer.

d. The initial and confirmatory test levels for a positive presence of alcohol shall be a
breath alcohol level of .021 or its urine concentration equivalent, unless a different
standard is required by paragraph (e) below.

e. If the test reveals a breath alcohol level of .021 through .039 or their urine

concentration equivalents, the Officer shall be relieved from duty without
compensation until the next duty day and shall submit to drug and alcohol testing
prior to his/her return to duty. If the return-to-duty test reveals an alcohol level of
.00, the Officer may return to duty and shall not be subject to discipline based on
the initial test result; however, during the six- (6-) month period following the date
of the initial test, the Officer will be selected for random drug and alcohol testing
from an eligibility pool consisting of similarly situated Officers.
If the return-to-duty test or any test administered within the six-(6-) month period
described above reveals any presence of alcohol, the Officer shall be relieved from
duty without compensation until ordered to return to duty, and the Random Drug
Testing Unit will refer the matter to the Internal Affairs Division.

If the test reveals a breath alcohol level equal to or greater than .04 or its urine
concentration equivalent, the Officer shall be relieved from duty without
compensation until ordered to return to duty, and the Random Drug Testing Unit
will refer the matter to the Internal Affairs Division. In the event discipline is
recommended, the Internal Affairs Division shall consider whether to agree to
hold the discipline in abeyance in exchange for the Officer's agreement to
participate in a rehabilitation program, remain drug and alcohol free

91
for a defined period and comply with other appropriate terms and conditions (i.e.,
a "last chance" agreement).

An Officer who is relieved from duty without compensation in accordance with
this subsection may utilize accrued elective time during the unpaid period of
absence.

shall be implemented effective January 1, 2012, or thereafter.

 

f. The above change:
Bidders and/or applicants for assignments in the Narcotics Section, Gang Enforcement
Section, Gang Investigation Section and Vice Control Section in the Organized Crime
Division and the Intelligence Section in the Counterterrorism and Intelligence Division
shall be required to submit to a drug and alcohol test prior to appointment. Thereafter,
all Officers assigned to these Units shall be selected for random drug and alcohol
testing from an eligibility pool consisting solely of Officers assigned to such Units.

B. The procedures applicable to drug testing conducted by the Department, regardless of whether
the basis for the testing is random, for cause or any other basis, shall be amended to include
the following:

1.

Ecstasy (MDA/MDMA) and steroids shall be added to the panel of substances for
which the Department tests, and Methaqualone shall be removed from such panel. The
modernized panel shall thus read as follows:

INITIAL CONFIRMATORY
SUBSTANCE TEST LEVEL TEST LEVEL
(ng/mL) (ng/mL)

Anabolic Steroids Any Presence Any Presence
Amphetamines 1000 500

Barbiturates 300

 

Benzodiazepines 300

Cocaine Metabolites

 

Marijuana Metabolites
MDA/MDMA
Methadone

 

Opiates

 

Phencyclidine

 

 

 

 

Propoxyphene

Initial and confirmatory test levels will be consistent with the federal regulations
promulgated by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration ("SAMHSA") for those substances covered
by such regulations.

92
3. During the term of this Agreement, the Department may add or remove
additional substances to the panel referred to above when it has reasonable
grounds for such addition or removal (such as when new drugs are developed
or changes occur in patterns of consumption of dangerous or illegal drugs),
provided that it shall provide Lodge 7 with thirty (30) days' advance written
notice and, upon request, meet with Lodge 7 to negotiate the addition or
removal of a substance to or from the panel. If the parties are unable to agree
on the addition or removal of a substance from the panel, the dispute shall be
resolved through the binding grievance arbitration procedure set forth in Article
9. The sole issue before the Arbitrator shall be whether the Department has a
reasonable basis for adding or removing the substance to or from the panel and
for the initial and confirmatory test levels.

4. Ifa test reveals a positive presence of a substance on the above panel or the abuse
of prescription drugs, the Random Drug Testing Unit will continue to refer the
matter to the Internal Affairs Division.

 

C. Effective upon ratification, in any instance where an Officer discharges his/ her
weapon, whether on or off duty, the Officer shall submit to drug and alcohol testing at
the direction of the Internal Affairs Division or any superior authority. If the Officer
has discharged his/her weapon off duty and the test reveals the presence of alcohol, the
Department shall not discipline the Officer based solely on the results of the alcohol
test when the Officer's actions are consistent with the Department's use of force
guidelines.

D. The Department's existing policies and orders regarding drug and alcohol use shall be
amended to state that an Officer is prohibited from consuming alcohol within the four-
(4-) hour period preceding the start of a previously scheduled shift or after receiving
notice to report for duty. Alleged violations of this rule cannot result in discipline
unless a test conducted pursuant to the testing procedures is positive.

E. The Department will continue to conduct its drug and alcohol testing program in
accordance with the regulations promulgated by the Illinois State Police set forth in
Title 20, Part 1286, of the Illinois Administrative Code.

93
NOTICE TO SUPERVISORS REGARDING PROGRESSIVE
DISCIPLINE

Supervisors, including Watch Commanders, retain the flexibility, authority and
discretion where circumstances warrant to issue reprimands to offending Officers
for infractions. Second or even repeated infractions of minor rules may, but do not
always, require increased punishment (particularly including loss of time or income)
when an oral or written reprimand will suffice to achieve the goal of correcting
improper behavior.

There is some belief that a progressive system of discipline requires enhanced
penalties no matter how insignificant the infraction. This is not correct.

You are permitted and urged to use your judgment in determining the appropriate
level of discipline. Officers in this Department are a valuable resource which should
not be wasted or unduly restricted.

94
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
REGARDING MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS

It is further understood that the below-listed benefits enjoyed by Officers covered
by this Agreement will be maintained for the duration of the Agreement and shall
not be diminished, modified, or eliminated during the term of the Agreement.

Sickness in family time

Change of uniforms at District

Use of department lockers and mailboxes

Use of gymnasium facilities during off-duty hours

Physical and optical examinations

Health care fringe benefits, including hospitalization insurance
Furloughs and compensatory (baby) furloughs

Marriage leave

Pension benefits as provided by statute

Utilization of compensatory time earned in partial tour or full tour
segments consistent with Article 20 and Article 23.5 of Agreement.

One half-hour lunch period taken during the tour of duty
Life insurance rates, including cost of optional insurance

Any obligation of the City of Chicago to indemnify Officers for punitive
damages assessed, adjudged, or otherwise levied shall be based upon City
Ordinances and/or State Statutes providing for such indemnification.

95
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
REGARDING DISTRICT UNIT BID ASSIGNMENTS

The Lodge and the Employer agree that Lodge members who have successfully bid
for the position of district desk or district lockup keeper will continue to function in
that position for the duration of this contract unless removed in accordance with the
provisions of Section 23.9.

The Lodge and the Employer further agree to open for bid in accordance with the
provisions of Section 23.9 the position of District Watch Relief in each of the Patrol
Division's 25 Districts. The member bidding for the position of District Watch
Relief must be able to perform to the satisfaction of the Employer the functions of a
desk Officer, lockup keeper and district review Officer after a period of orientation.
Successful district bid members will be utilized in bid assignments before full duty
non-bid members. When not required to function as district watch relief; the
member will be assigned to district patrol duties.

 

The Employer shall select the most senior qualified bidder for the position of
District Watch Relief. If there are not sufficient bidders to fill a District Watch
Relief position declared vacant by the Employer, the Employer shall fill such
vacancy within its discretion.

The following are the number of District Desk, District Lockup, and District Watch
Relief positions subject to bid under the provisions of Section 23.9:

 

Dist Desk Lockup _ W/Relief Dist Desk Lockup _ W/Relief
001 6 0 9 014 6 3 9
002 6 6 12 O15 6 3 9
003 6 3 016 6 3 9
004 6 3 9 017 6 3 9
005 6 6 12 018 6 3 9
006 6 3 9 019 6 6 12
007 6 3 9 020 6 3 9
008 6 3 9 021 6 3 9
009 6 3 9 022 6 3 9
010 6 3 9 023 6 3 9
oll 6 6 12 024 6 3 9
012 6 3 9 025 6 6 12
013 6 3

96
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
REGARDING BIDDING PROCEDURES

The City of Chicago and the Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago Lodge No. 7,
jointly agree that the following procedures and interpretations will apply to
processing bids to Fill Recognized Vacancies in accordance with Section 23.8 of
the contract:

1.

All sworn full duty non-probationary members below the career service rank of
sergeant will be allowed to bid for one transfer request. Members who are
currently on the medical roll but who are otherwise full duty will be allowed to
bid.

Bids for vacancies must be submitted in accordance with the instructions
contained in the Recognized Vacancy Announcement and must be forwarded to
the Management and Labor Affairs Section within 72 hours of the time the
announcement is posted. Members may fax a copy of the bid to the
Management and Labor Affairs Section to ensure timely receipt; however, two
copies of the properly completed bid form must also be forwarded to the
Management and Labor Affairs Section. The bid form must contain the
signature of the member, and the signature of his or her commanding officer/
watch commander specifying the date and time the bid was submitted.

A successful bidder may not bid for another recognized vacancy within one
police period year unless reassigned by the Employer. For example, a member
who submits a successful bid in the 11th period for a 12th period vacancy in
2000 is not eligible to submit another bid to fill a recognized vacancy until the
11th period of 2001 for a 12th period of 2001 vacancy.

Probationary members may not submit a bid to fill a recognized vacancy
while on probation. A probationary member whose probationary period will
expire during the 72-hour period to submit bids, may submit a bid for a
recognized vacancy. The member must be off probation at the time of the
bid. A member whose probationary period expires after the 72-hour bid
period but prior to the beginning of the period when the vacancy will be
filled is not eligible to bid.

The member is responsible for ensuring that the bid form set has been received
by the Management and Labor Affairs Section by the deadline specified in the
Recognized Vacancy Announcement. The member will forward the original
and white copy to the Management and Labor Affairs Section, the green copy
to the Lodge, and will retain the gold copy for their records.

Bids which do not contain the required information or are otherwise improperly
completed will not be accepted.

97
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING AND AGREEMENT
REGARDING PHYSICAL FITNESS

The City of Chicago and Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 7 jointly recognize

that physical fitness of police Officers is of mutual benefit to the officers, the City
and the public.

Therefore, the City and the Lodge hereby agree to undertake a joint effort to
develop a reasonable physical fitness program applicable to all bargaining unit
members.

The City and the Lodge hereby establish a Physical Fitness Committee consisting of
3 members designated by the Lodge and 3 members designated by the
Superintendent of Police. The Committee may be assisted by such consultants or
other individuals (paid for by the Employer, provided the Employer agrees to their
participation) as may be necessary to accomplish its goals.

The Committee's recommendations shall be advisory only. Upon receipt of the
Committee's recommendations, the Superintendent may adopt or modify the
recommended program. If the Superintendent modifies the program, he/she shall so
notify the Committee and the Lodge in writing. Within ten (10) calendar days of
such notice, the Lodge may request arbitration of the modifications under Article 9.
The issue before the arbitrator shall be whether the modifications proposed by the
Superintendent are reasonable.

 

No Officer shall be discharged, suspended, relieved from duty, demoted, or
disciplined in any manner under or relating to any physical fitness program.

98
PHYSICAL FITNESS INCENTIVE

In an effort to promote physical fitness among the Officers covered by this
Agreement, the Employer and Lodge agree to the following:

Beginning in 2001, every officer covered by this Agreement will have
one opportunity annually to schedule an appointment for a physical
fitness test. An Officer will have one opportunity to re-schedule the test,
but will only be allowed to take the test once each year. The test must
take place prior to November | of every year.

An Officer will complete a waiver which indicates that he or she is
volunteering to take this test and will not hold the Employer liable for
any injuries or illness that occurs as a result of his or her participation in
the testing process.

e Successful completion of the physical fitness test will result in payment
of a physical fitness premium of $350, payable December 1 of the year
the Officer successfully completes the test.

e It is understood that this is a voluntary program. Officers who participate
in the physical fitness test will do so during off-duty hours without
compensation.

e =©Any injury, illness, or death that results from participation in this
program will not be considered an Injury on Duty or a death in the
performance of duty.

e The performance requirement for each test is based on the State of
Illinois P.O.W.E.R. test. Officers must pass every test and meet the
minimum standards listed below to qualify for the physical fitness

 

 

 

 

premium:
MALE FEMALE
Test 23-29 | 30-39 | 40-49 | 50+ 23-29 | 30-39 | 40-49 50+
Sit & Reach 16.0 15.0 13.8 12.8 18.8 17.8 16.8 16.3
1
Minute 37 34 28 23 31 24 19 13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

99

 

 
 

Maximum
Bench Press

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ratio 98 87 79 70 58 52 49 43
1.5 Mile Run 13.46 | 14.31 | 15.24 | 16.21 16.21 | 16.52 | 17.53 | 18.44
e The following are not subject to the grievance procedure:

The test standards.

The results of the testing.

The medical status of an Officer who is injured participating in this

program.

100

 

 
 

 
  
  

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
RE: HEALTH CARE PLAN - F.0.P., LODGE 7

‘This memorandum confirms our conversations relating to health care contributions in the
situation where a bargaining unit officer has a spouse employed by the City. The City will not
require such employees to pay two single contributions.

If an officer is married to another City employee (whether in or out of the F.O.P,
bargaining unit), it is'understood that the employee whose plan is selected shall be required to
pay the appropriate contribution (in the case where the spouse is oulside the F.O.P, unit).
Furthermore, dependent eligibility will be determined by the plan of the employee making the
contributions.

In the event the officer elects to be covered as a dependent on his/her spouse's plan, and
the spouse is not an F.0,P, bargaining unit member, the officer’s health care benefits will be
determined in accordance with the provisions of that plan and not the plan applicable to the
F.O.P. or the several memoranda of understanding applicable to the F,O.P, plan.

It is also agreed by the Lodge and the Employer that, in the event that two employees
marry in the future, or the spouse of a current employee becomes an employee of the City, the
required clection will be made within thirty (30) days of the date of marriage, The required
election will be made by contacting the City of Chicago Benefits Eligibility Unit to receive the
forms necessary to make the election, Further information is set forth in the Eniployee Benefits
Handbook.

Officers who are unavailable for reasons such as leave of absence, medical, furlough,
cte,, will be allowed to make the election within seven (7) working days of their return to duty.

It is understood that this agreement will be incorporated into the City of Chicago Medical
Plan for sworn police employees, as well as the plan available to non-swor personnel (F.0.P.
Revision December, 1989) as revised.

Please acknowledge your agreement in the space provided below,
AGREED: AGREED:

aiaiiias #7

ity of Chicago

@

ies C, Franczek, Jr.
ef Labor Negotiator

  
 
 
 

   

   

Dated; November 20, 2000 Dated: November 20, 2000

101
 

FRANCZEK SULLIVAN Pe.

ATTORNEYS AT LAW 300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE
SUITE 3400
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60606
JAMES C. FRANCZEK, JR. PHONE 312-986-0300
312-786-6110 PAX 312-986-9192
jef@nlfpc.com hetp://www.nlfpe.com

November 8, 2000

Thomas J. Pleines, Esq

General Counsel

F.O.P.,, Chicago Lodge No, 7
1412 West Washington Boulevard
Chicago, Illinois 60607-1821

Re: — Alternative Medical Coverage
Dear Tom:

This letter sets forth ihe parties’ agreement with respect to the issue of alternate medical
coverage in the case of employees who fail to comply with the City's medical plan enrollment
requirements.

& The City will offer alternate coverage for individuals who (a) are otherwise eligible
under the Plan; (b) have been denied coverage under the Plan because they failed to comply with the
Plan's enrollment requirements; (c) first became eligible for coverage subsequent to the close of the
last most recent open enrollment period, and (d) agrees to pay the required premium,

2. In addition to the foregoing, persons who are entitled to coverage as the spouse of an
eligible employee shall not be eligible for alternate coverage if the spouse is currently covered by
other medical insurance coverage. Also, the employee must not be covering another person as
spouse at the time the application for coverage is made by the employee

3. When an employee who has applied for coverage for an otherwise eligible dependent
is denied coverage because of failure to mect enrollment deadlines, the employee shall be notified
of the availability of the Alternative Coverage. The employee shall have thirty (30) days to respond
to the offer of Alternative coverage. The employee shall elect one of the following:

a. Retrospective coverage. Coverage shall be effective as of the date the
dependent would have been eligible for coverage had the employee
completed the enrollment on a timely basis. If the employee elects
retrospective coverage, the employee must pay the required premium

102
“ a o” ,

 

 

FRANCZEK SULLIVAN ?Pe,
ATTORNEYS AT LAW

‘Thomas J, Pleines, Esq.
Nayember 8, 2000
Page2 ~

from the date of eligibility through the next December 31, Premium
payment(s) shall be due for the period of retrospective coverage upon
submission of the application, Premiums shall be due theresfler no
Jeter than the first day of the month for which the coverage is
effective,

b. Prospective coverage oaly. Coverage shall be effective on the first
day of the month following the month in which the required premium
is submitted. Premiums are due thereafter no later than the first day
of the month for which the coverage is effective,

€, In the event the employee fails to apply for Alternative coverage
within the time specified, the employee may next apply for coverage
for the dependent during the open enrollment period. No further offer
of Alternative Coverage shall be made to the employee with respect
to the applicable dependent,

4. ‘The Alternative Coverage shall be provided on the same basis as the coverage of the
plan selected by the employee, Coverage shall be made available under the Alternative Plan as of
the Effective Date of the Alternative Coverage without regard to pre-existing conditions, The
dependent covered under the Alternative Coverage will be included in the membership unit of the
employee. Further, covered expenses will be included in any calculation of deductible or out-of-
pocket expenses, annual and lifetime benefit macmums in accordance with the applicable plan.

5. The cost of the Alternative Coverage as of the effettive date of this amendment shall
be $130 per covered person per month. However, no eruployee shall be required to pay more than
$390 per month effective with the effective date of this amendment, The premium for the
Alternative Coverage shall b¢ adjusted on each January } occurring thereafter by the amount of the
change in the Medical Care Component of the Consumer Price Index for Urban wage earners forthe
most recently reported 12 months,

6. Premiums for the Alternative Coverage shall be made in the form of a check or
money order. Cash cannot be accepted, nor can a deduction be made from the paycheck of an
employee, In the event an employee submits a check which is retumed from the bank because of
non-sufficient funds (NSF), the Altemative Coverage shall be terminated as of the last day for which
premium payments have been received.

103
 

FRANCZEK SULLIVAN?C.
ATTORNEYS AT LAW

Thomas J. Pleines, Esq.

November 8, 2000

Page3

Ifthe foregoing comports with your understandings, please sign in the space indicated below,
Very truly yours,
* .
Tired dea wack i

James C. Franczek, Jr. :

AGREED: a

Thomas J. Pleines, For the F.O.P., Lodge No. 7

JCF:mp
cc; Deputy Superintendent Jeanne Clark
Darka Papushkewych, Esq
* Commander George Rosebrock

104
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412 WENT WASHINGTON ROULKVARD # CICA GO, HLANOIN 6n6HF712T
PHONE) N1278SI776 PAX! MAINT

     
   
 

   

  

June 15, 2000
J, NOLAN
pert
won PODGOANY
‘et Vice President Mr. James C. Franczek, Jr,
JOHN 0. CARRY Franczek & Sullivan, PC
enhouirta 300 S. Wacker Drive, Suite 3400
ba nt Chicago, IL. 60606-6785
(ERA C, BURT
” Receding Becretmy Re; Educational Reimbursement
AL GARSKI
ere Dear Jim:
JOM CAPPAREL
‘This letter confirms our discussions and acknowledgment that effective June 15,
i pie 2000, the benefits provided by Article 24 of the Agreement apply to courses
mown taken on the Intemet, provided that these courses meet the requirements set forth
TERENCE J. oni in Sections A.1, through 4, Further, such courses must be offered by colleges or
eT RN universities accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and
Onn. onan Secondary Schools,
immediate Past Prewdont
If this letter accurately states our discussions regarding Asticle 24, please sign
iielead your name below,
DEAN ANGELO
Chairman Sinéerel;
HAROLD BROWN
CARLOS &, CORTES
Mane DONAHUE Thomas J. Plein
omas J. Pleines
508 Dowie General Counsel
omer a mL
taxes TIPAaj
“one
Sounee has Agreed and acknowledged
FON SHOGREN
TOM SKELLY
FiCK WAGNER
JOHN YANEZ a
C. Franczek, Jr,
THOMAS J. PLEINES the City of Chicago
Gerora’ Counsel

   

11VOP Cs regen aniouit 89 Peaveipantence toncath edscational reimbunement 0614-00. mps

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS:

om

105
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412. WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD + CHICAGO, HLLINO'S #0807-1821
PHO: 312-733-7776 + PAK: 312-733-1367,

     
     

November 17, 2000
Ms. Darka Papushkewych
« Chief Labor Negotiator
WILLIAM J. NOLAN City of Chicago, Department of Law
ee 30N. LaSalle Street, Suite 1020
ae Chicago, IL 60602
JP ice Procent Re: Negotiations / "Patter and Practice” Litigation
HAROLD A. KUNZ
ee Dear Ms. Papushkewych:
SHEILA C. BURKE
apes This letter will confirm the concems that the Lodge raised regarding potential
Treanwer “pattern and practice” litigation that might be brought against the Chicago Police
JOHNT, CAPPARELL! Department by the United States Department of Justice, We ere both aware that
leant aeommy such litigation bas resulted in consent decrees being entered in several cities
which arguably impact the collective bargaining agreements in effect. We have
further discussed the fact that the FOP has attempted to intervene and affect the
a oni litigation in those cities.
‘DHABL T. SULLIVAN

‘The parties understand that, in the eventofsuch a lawsuit, the City has no control

SOHN Mh DINEEN, cover whether the Lodge is a party to the litigation, Furthermore, the City is not
expressing an opinion on whether the Lodge has any legal claim or right to
intervene, Nevertheless, the City will agree to meet and confer with the Lodge
Westee in the event of such litigation to allow the Lodge to express its concems and
‘OEAN ANGELO viewpoint regarding any issues that may impact the rights and obligations which
buna exist under the collective bargaining agreement.

  

Lateran General Counsel

‘Tow SKELLY Agreed and acknowledged on behalf of the City of Chicago:

THOMAS J. PLEINES Darka P:
Chief Labor Negotiator
INTO cb scpsiniondl PP coreg endenar papashinew yeh {1-179 poner & pricore op!

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS
“a=

106
  

WILLIAM J, NOLAN
Prasigant

B08 PODGORNY
‘Yat Vice Preaktent
JOHN 0. CAREY
ang ee President

HAROLOR, KUNZ
31d Vice President
RMBILA C, BURKE
Rocording Secrotwy
AL BAASKI
Treasuror

JOHN. © ut
Financiat Secrotary

Sorgeants-Ab Ams
JIM OVEARY
TORENGE J O'NEILL

SHARL T, SULLIVAN,

JOHN M1, OINEEN
Immediate Past Presktent

Trustees

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
CHICAGO LODGE #7
1412 WENT. WASHINGTON BOULEVARD + CHCA GO, HLINOES 60007-1N2t
PUOONE: 392-7)8-7776 + FAN: 312-733-107
November 14, 2000

Ms, Darka Papushkewych
Chief Labor Negotiator

City of Chicago, Department of Law
30N, LaSalle Street, Suite 1020
Chicago, IL 60602

Re: — Negotiations / Section 8.4
Dear Ms, Papushkewych:

‘This letter will confirm our agreement, reached during negotiations for a
successor to the collective bargaining agreement which expired onJune30, 1999,
conceming Section 8.4. The Department has proposed the inclusion of new
language in para graph two of Section 8.4 concerning what use may be made of
disciplinary investigations which are categorized as “not sustained.” The parties
agree that if'a “not sustained” file is relied upon, it will be noted in the CR file
being investigated. ‘The disciplinary history will be limited to a five- (5) year
retention period for sustained findings only and a one- (1) year retention period
for summary punishments,

‘The inclusion of this language in Section 8,4 is not meant in any way to change
oralter the fact that the Department has the burden of establishing that it had just
cause to impose discipline or that the amount of discipline imposed is appropriate
under the circumstances of any case. Further, the inclusion of this language does
not prevent the Lodge from challenging whether the “not sustained” file(s) relied
upon was sufficiently similar in number or type to be relevant and competent to
be used for the purpose for which the Department has used the “not sustained”
file, Further, the Lodge reserves the right to argue the relevancy and weight it
believes is appropriate to those files,

If this letter accurately reflects your understanding and agreement regarding this
issue, please sign where indicated and return a copy to me,

  

a ; Pleines, General Counsel

Agreed and acknowledged on behalf of the City of Chicago;

Darka Papushke Chief legotiator

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS

107

 
   
 
  

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412 WEST WASHINGTON ROULRVARD + CHICAGO, TLLINOMS 60667-1827
PHONE: M2-733-7776 + FAX: 312-733-1567

November 9, 2000

Ms. Darka Papushkewych

Chief Labor Negotiator
City of Chicago, Department of Law
30 N. LaSalle Street, Suite 1020
Chicago, IL 60602

Re: Negotiations / Section 8.7
Dear Ms. Papushkewych:

This letter will confirm our agreement, reached during negotiations for a successor to the collective
bargaining agreement which expired on Junc 30, 1999, concerning Section 8.7. The listing of the job
tities of Detective, Youth Officer and Gang Crime Specialist in paragraph one of Section 8.7 is not to
be construed to mean that the absence of any other D-2 job tities from this Section indicates a waiver
of the just cause standard conceming the demotion or removal of an officer from any other D-2 job title.

The position of the Lodge is that just cause is the appropriate standard of review whenever the
Department seeks the removal or demotion of an officer from a D-2 position. The position of the
Department is that just cause is not the appropriate standard of review in ali cases where the Department
seeks the removal or demotion of an officer from a D-2 position. Furthermore, it is the Department's
position that just cause for removal/demotion may exist in a situation where the removal/demotion is
not for disciplinary reasons, i.e., where the Department demonstrates that an individual officer is unable
or unwilling to satisfy the reasonable requirements of the D-2 position for whatever reason(s).

In the event the Department seeks to demote or remove an officer from a D-2 position other than
Detective, Youth Officer, or Gang Crime Specialist, each party reserves the right to argue whether just
cause is the appropriate standard of reviewv of the Department’s action in that particular case.

If this letter accurately reflects your understanding and agreement regarding this issue, please sign where
indicated and return 2 copy to me.

ThomasT. Pieines
General Counsel

Agreed and acknowledged on behaif of the City of Chicago:

ha

Darka Papushkewpgh, Chief gotiator

108

 
   
 
  

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE (7

 
  

1412 WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD * CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60607-1821
PHONE: 312-783-7776 = FAX: 312-733-1967

 
 

January 20, 2000

Mr. James C. Franezek, Jr.
Franczek & Sullivan, PC

300 S. Wacker Drive, Suite 3400
Chicago, IL 60606-6785

Re: Negotiations - City Proposal Re: Article 18
Dear Jim:

This letter is to confirm our mutual understandings and agreements in regard to
the City’s proposal to change the current Janguage of the Agreement by replacing
the terms “Department physician” and “Medical Director” with the term
“Medical Services Section.”

The Department's expressed reason for this proposed change in the language of
the Agreements to have the Agreement reflect the terminology currently, and for
the foreseeable future, in use concerning the Medical Services Section. It is not
the Department's intention that this change in terminology will allow medical
decisions which are required to be made by a doctor to be made by anyone other
than a qualified doctor. It is not the Department's intent to in any Way alter its
current practices in regard to medical decisions,

If this letter accurately states our understandings and agreements concerning this

change in terminology, but not in practices, please sign your name below and
return it to me.

Thomas J, Pleines
General Counsel

Agreed and acknowledged on behalf of the City of Chicago:

 

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS

109
  

WALUAM J. NOLAN
Prescot

PODGOANY
‘Ist Vice President
JOHN. CAREY

‘2nd View President

HAROLD R.KUNZ:
‘3 Vice Fresicent

SHERA C BURKE
Recording

Teaser
JOH T, CAPPARELLI
Francal Secrewy

FENCE J. ONERLL
JARELT. SULLIVAN,

SOHN M. DINEEN
erenesiate Paat President

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE #7

 
  
 

 

1412 WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD + CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60667-1821

PHONE: S12-733-7776+ PAX: M2-7ALLNGT

August 22, 2000
Mr. James C, Franczek, Jr.
Franczek, Sullivan, P.C.
3008. Wacker Drive, Suite 3400

Chicago,IL 60606-6785
Re: Videotaping of Witnesses Before the Police Board
Dear Jim:

‘This letter will confirm our discussions and agreement that the testimony of ai!
‘Witnesses in hearings conducted by the Police Board of the City of Chicago will
be video-recorded in addition to the current practice of stenographically recording
their testimony. The videotape, the written transcripts, and all evidence will be
forwarded to the Board members for their consideration and deliberations as a
part of the record.

Additionally, the City of Chicago shall amend the Municipal Code of Chicago,
Section 2-84-030, paragraph ten to read:
No member of the board may participate in any disciplinary
recommendation or action without having read the written record
and having viewed the taped testimony of the witnesses upon
which said recommendation or action is based.

The City and the Lodge also acknowledge that certain details such as who will
perform the video recording, provide and care for the equipment, and the date
taping will begin, need to also be resolved through further discussions.

If this letter accurately sets forth our understanding and agreement, please sign
your name below and retum a copy Of this letter to me.

Si
Thomas J. Pleines
General Counsel

Agreed and acknowledged on behalf of the City of Chicago:

  

REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS

110
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
REGARDING DISPUTED L.0.D. CLAIMS

The employer will acknowledge in writing its responsibility for medical bills
arising from [OD matters by providing a letter to officers receiving second or
subsequent notices from covered health care institutions and collection agencies,
said letter to be signed by the Director of Personnel or his or her designee, or the
Medical Services Section Director or his or her designee, within ten (10) days
of a grievance request for said letter. Such notices shall be submitted by the
officer to the Director of Human Resources, Chicago Police Department. The
Lodge shall be advised in writing of the name and business address/location of
the incumbent Director as well as successor Directors. By way of example, the
following language should be made available on City of Chicago letterhead:
Dear :

(Name) has incurred medical expenses in
connection with an injury which he/she is claiming arose in the line of duty.
Please be advised that the City of Chicago guarantees payment of your medically
necessary services for (Name).

If the injury is determined to have arisen in the line of duty, the City has assumed
liability for all medical expenses incurred and you will be reimbursed accordingly
by the Committee on Finance. If the injury is found not to be duty related,
reimbursements will be made by the claims administrator of the city of Chicago's
medical plan in accordance with its provisions.

Because you are medical services will be reimbursed by one of the entities noted
above, the City cautions that you suspend efforts to obtain payment directly
from (Name) sf payment of medical services
arising from his/her injury, and that you not initiate or pursue any collection or
garnishment actions against (Name)

For further information please contact

1
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE #7

  

   

1412 WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD + CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60607-1821
PHONE (312)930-9696 » FAX (312) 930-9967

October 18, 1996

VIA HAND DELIVERY

Mr. James C. Franczek, Jr.

Pranczek, Sullivan, Mann,
Crement, Hein, Relias, PC

300 S. Wacker Drive, Suite 3400

Chicago, IL 60606-6785

Re: Lodge 7 and the City of Chicago Article 22 Indemnification

Dear Mr, Franczek:

Har tabsera gla beoemgemgy rar! edbetey tyres ti Mere
the Lodge relating to Article 22 i 1), including Section 22.3, of the
collective bargaining agreement. It is understood and agreed than an officer’s invocation
of Fifth Amendment Rights (U.S. Constitution) shall not be considered by the parties to
constitute “non-cooperation” within the meaning of Section 22.3 where legal
representation offered by the Employer does not provide assurances of confidentiality and
the attorney-client privilege.

It is the City’s position, with which the Lodge agrees and on which the Lodge relies,
that once an officer is named as a defendant in a civil cause of action resulting from or
arising out of the performance of duties and he is required to submit to an interview with
attorneys or investigators representing, associated with, or acting under the authority of
the office of the Corporation Counsel to discuss the case, the resulting conversation is
confidential and shielded from disclosure by the attorney-client privilege. As at least one
arbitrator has acknowledged the privileged character of such communications:

However, it is generally agreed that preliminary discussions with counsel are

privileged even though the attorney does not ultimately represent the person making

the statements.

‘Thus, communications from the Grievant to the Assistant Counsel

clearly would have been privileged i (David

Scephans), Malin, 1987, pp. 7-8.

We, of course, understand that under such circumstances, an officer who
nevertheless invokes his Fifth Amendment rights is deemed to have failed to cooperate
in the “investigation, administration or litigation” of the claim.

Tt is further understood that when an officer invokes his or her Fifth Amendment
tights in the course of a disciplinary (i.c., complaint register) investigation conducted by
IAD or OPS, such conduct, standing alone, is not considered to constitute a breach of the
duty to cooperate within the meaning of Section 22.3. (However, the City takes the

ition, with which the Lodge docs not concur, that an officer's silence during a
Bepacuccsl iovesigalica eos be tbe liso toviat bce seececietion cheba te
conduct complained of in the civil cause of action resulted from or arose out of the
performance of duties (Section 22.1) and whether the officer seeking legal representation
‘was acting within the scope of his or her employment (Section 22.4)).

Please signify your concurrence with the above in the space provided.

ae rite Cone.

Chief Negotiator for the City

112

 
 
 
  
   
   
 

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412. WEST WASHINGTON BOULRVARD + CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60607. 182)
PHONE (3121930.9606 = PAX (312) 990-9907

January 9, 1997

Mr, James C. Franczck, Jr,

Franceek, Sullivan, Mann, Crement, Hein, Relias, PC
300 S. Wacker Dr., Suite 3400

Chicago, IL 60606-6785

RE: Vehicle License Plate / City Sticker Violations
Dear Jim:

This letter concems our prior agreement, as set forth in your letter of August 1,
1996, regarding the procedure the Department would follow in the event that the
Department has cause to believe that a momber of this bargaining unit is operating a
vehicle which may be in violation of the licensing requirements mandated by either the
State of Minois or the City of Chicago, After August 1, 1996 the parties met on
Numerous occasions to discuss the feasibility of implementing that agreement as well as
whether or not the letter of August 1, 1996 was as extensive and comprehensive as the
parties desired it to be to give effect to our respective goals, The conclusion reached by
the parties was that the procedures set forth in your letter were not workable.

The parties have met to negotiate this issue. As a result of this further negotiation,

the Sllonig proses was agreed to and will be followed in all cases where the

8 Cause to believe that a member of this bargaining unit is operating a

motor vehicle which is not properly licensed under the laws of the State of Iilinols or the

Municipal Code of the city of Chicago, This letter and the following procedure replaces
und superceeds your letter of August 1, 1996 and the procedure contained therein.

‘The Department will no longer handle violations of this type as a part of the
Complaint Register process. We agree that when a member of this bargaining unit is
alleged to have fatled to purchase, renew, or display current Illinois license plates on the
vehicle the member |s operating the following procedure will be followed:

1. A supervisor will prepare only # Summary Punishment Action Request (SPAR)
form against the member noting the violation. No Complaint Register Number
(CR#) will be issued,

2. Where the violation noted ts the failure to purchase, renew, and/or display
current State of Hlinols license plates, the SPAR form will be processed with a
recommendation for disciplinary action not to exceed a one (1) day suspension,

3. The member will have ten (10) working days to show compliance with the State
of Illinois licensing requirements. If the member docs not comply within ten (10)
working days, or in the event of prior licensing violations in the past one year
period, the employer may issue a CR.

4, We further agree that when a member of this bargaining unit is alloged to have
failed to purchase or display a city vehicle sticker, the member shall have five
(5) working days to demonstrate that he did purchase the city vehicle sicker
within the time specified by the City. In the event the member cannot
demonstrate within five (5) working days that be did properly purchase the city
vehicle sticker within the time specified by the City, the SPAR form will be
processed with a recommendation for disciplinary action not to excced a one (1)
day suspension,

5. The momber will have ten (10) working days to show compliance with the City
of Chicago vehicle sticker requirement, If the member does not comply within
ten (10) working days, or in the event of prior city vehicle sticker violations in
the past one year period, the employer may issue a CR4,

6, In the event the member can demonstrate that he did purchase the city vehicle
sticker within the time specified by the City and offer a reasonable explanation

113
   

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE #7

   
  

1412 WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD * CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60607-1821
PHONE (312)930-9696 + FAX (312) 930-9967

why the city vehicle sticker was not displayed, the SPAR will be disposed of
with no discipline imposed and the SPAR will not appear on the member's
disciplinary record.
it is further agreed that the retention period for a SPAR form upon which discipline
is entered will be one (1) year from the date of the incident. Ail other provisions of this
collective bargaining agreement and the Department's orders concerning internal appeals,
grievability, and the satisfaction of discipline imposed through the use of the SPAR form
remain in force and effect and are applicable to the vehicle violations referred to in this
letter,

If this letter accurately represents your understanding and agreement regarding these
proced: ign your name below.

Thomas J. Pleines C. Franczek, Jr.
General Counsel For the City

114
 

 

FRANCZEK SULLIVAN?D«.

ATTORNEYS AT LAW 300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE
t SUITE 3400
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60606
JAMES C. FRANCZBK, JR. PHONE 312-986-0300

312-786-6110 PAX 312-986-9192
jfnlp.com heapi/ vw com

July 23, 1996

Mr. Thomas J, Pleines, General Counsel

F.0.P,, No.7

600 West Fulton Street, Suite 300

Chicago, IL 60661

Re: Mentorandunt of Understanding One-Half Hour Lunch Period

Dear Tom;

‘This will confirm the understanding of the purties with to the one-half hour
lunch period referenced in the Memorantum of Underst incorporated in the
collective bargaining agreement between the partics, The panics agree and understand
that this one-half hour period is normally an uncompensated lunch period. In the event
that an officer works in excess of eight (8) hours in a ghven tour of duty because he
has been required (o perform during a meal period, the officer may request
overtime compensation in accordance with the terms of the contract. Such requests shall
be initinted and processed according to the procedures set forth in the applicable general
order(s) governing all requests for overtime compenmation.

Please indicare your agreement with this letter by signing on the line provided.

As always, We are appreciative of your kind courtesies,

 

Very truly yours,
1
Mest aosel)
lames C. Fronezek, Jr. ‘Thomas J. Pleines
Chief Labor Negotlatar General Counsel
JCFimp

ce: Ms, Darks Papushkewych
Mr. William Nolan

115
 

FRANCZEK SULLIVANP«.

ATTORNEYS AT LAW 300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE
SUITE 3400
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60606
JAMES C. FRANCZE] PHONE 312-986-0300
; 312-786-6110 Bie: PAX 312-986-9192
jof@nlfpc.com hetp://werw.alfpe.com

July 23, 1996

‘Thomas J. Pieines, Esq.

General Counsel

F.O.P., Chi ¢ No. 7
S00 West Fue Stee Sulte 300
Chicago, Mtinois 60661

Re: LETTER OF AGREEMENT - Furloughs from Mounted Unit

Dear Tom:

‘This letter confirms our discussions ending the mounted unit and scheduling of
mounted unit furlough during the summer months,

‘The Lodge and the City agree te allow (wo ineccbers of the Mounted Unit to select
furlough segments 5B and 9B and to allow onc (1) member of the mounted unit to selecy
furlough segments 6A and 9A in addition (0 the current authorized furlough segments for
the 1997 furlough selection process, The Lodge asd the City agree that authorized
extensions for furlough segment 6A and 9A by use of elective time such as personal
days, haby furlough days or compensatory time wilt not be granted.

‘The Lodge and the City also aot that during 1997, prior to the furlough sclection
for 1998, both partics will mect and discuss authorizing additional furlough segments
during the summer months for members assigned (0 the mounted unit.

If the understandings contained in this letter comport with yours, please sign this
Actter and return i€ to me “il

James C, Franczek, Jr, Thomas J. Pleines
Chief Labor Negotiator General Counsel

JCF,mp

  

116
 

FRANCZEKRADELET (29)

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS ey

 

200 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 3400 1 CHICAGO, IL 60606
‘T 992.986.0300 | Fy 312.986.9192 | WWW RANCZIK.COM

JAMES C, FRANCZEK, JR.
312.786,6110
jef@franczek.com

September 3, 2014

Dean C. Angelo, Sr,

President

Fraternal Order of Police,
Chicago Lodge No, 7

1412 West Washington Blvd.

Chicago, IL 60607

Dear President Angelo:

This letter confirms the parties’ agreement that the City of Chicago will continue to remit
to the Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago Lodge No. 7, a sum of $75,000.00 within thirty (30)
days of the final date of ratification of this Agreement for 2014, and during, the first quarter of
calendar years 2015, 2016, and 2017.

The Lodge agrees that these remittances shall be used for the sole purpose of sponsoring
health fairs for its members. The Lodge further agrees to advise the City in writing regarding the
planning, participation, implementation and results of its health fairs and will meet with the City
upon request to discuss such matters,

The parties recognize that the City is under no obligation to continue these remittances
beyond calendar year 2017, Any remittances beyond calendar year 2017 remain a subject for
future negotiations.

Your acknowledgement and agreement is appreciated in the space provided below,

Very truly yours,

James C, Franczek, Jr.
AGREED;

2 LL Le

117
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

100 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 1400 | CHICAGO, It. 60606
Ti 342.986.0300 1 Fi 312.986.9192 | WWW.IRANCZEK,COM

JAMES ©. FRANCZEK, JR.
312.786.6110
Jef@franczek.com

September 3, 2014

Dean C, Angelo, Sr.
President
Fraternal Order of Police,
Chicago Lodge No. 7
1412 West Washington Blvd.
Chicago, IL. 60607
Re: Vocational Training Program

Dear President Angelo:

This letter confirms the parties’ agreement that the Employer will continue to offer an
appropriate vocational training program for officers who receive duty or occupational disability

benefits and who desire to avail themselves of such program. The continuation of the program is
subject to the monies appropriated for such program, which shall be at least $120,000.00 for

2014 through 2017,
Your acknowledgement and agreement is appreciated in the space provided below,

Very truly yours,
x 1@ hangeh db,

James C. Franezek, Jr.

 

118
FRANCZEK SULLIVAN pc.

ATTORNEYS AT LAW 300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE
SUITE 3400
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60606
JAMES C. PFRANCZBK, JR. PHONE 312-986-0300
312-786-6110 PAX 312-986-9192
jcf@franczek.com hetpsi/worw. franceek.com
March 7, 2005

Joel A. D’Alba, Esq.
Asher, Gittler, Greenfield & D*Alba, Led.
200 West Jackson Boulevard
Suite 1900
Chicago, Illinois 60606
Re: Medical Services Section/Referral Physician List
Dear Mr. D’Alba:

This letter confirms our agreement with respect to the list of approximately 800
referral physicians maintained by the Depattment’s Medical Services Scction (“MSS”). An
officer seeking, a referral for an inyury on duty will be allowed to select any physician vo this
list within the specialty appropriate to the treatment of the officer's injury(s).

‘The Department reserves the right both to add physicians to the physician referral
list and to remove physicians from the list. The Department agrees that physicians will not
be removed from the list for arbitrary or capricious reasons. The Department agrees to
mect with designated representatives of the Lodge on a quarterly basis for the purpose,
among others, of discussing the composition of the referral list, including suggestions for
expansion of the list and to respond to Lodge inquiries concerning removals from the list.

If this letter accuratcly reflects your understanding and agreement regarding this
issuc, please sign where indicated and retum a copy to me.

 

119
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE CITY OF CHICAGO AND
THE FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, CHICAGO LODGE No. 7
RE: DEPARTMENT-PROCURED OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

The parties agree to implement a Department-procured outside employment
program, subject to the following terms and conditions:

A. The Department-procured outside employment program is a voluntary

Cc.

program that allows non-probationary full-duty officers to work on their days
off for non-governmental employers, subject to the terms and conditions set
forth below.

The Department will procure outside employment opportunities; however,
officers who participate in the program will work directly for the non-
governmental employer for a pre-determined uniform rate of pay established
exclusively by the Employer, and the non-governmental employer shall be
solely responsible for paying each officer and otherwise accounting for the
officer’s compensation.

An officer’s cligibility for Department-procured outside employment is
governed by the following terms and conditions:

1. An officer is not eligible to work any Department-procured outside
employment assignment under the following circumstances:

a. The officer’s most recent overall performance rating was “requires
improvement” or “unacceptable”.

b, The officer is serving a suspension or has been relieved from regular
duty as a result of summary punishment.

c. The officer is on the medical roll or has been released from the
medical roll for furlough.

d. During the thirty- (30-) day period prior to the date of the officer's
application, the officer was absent from duty for five (5) or more
days as a result of a non-duty-related injury or illness.

e. The officer’s disciplinary record contains three (3) or more summary
punishment actions within the prior twelve- (12-) month period.

f. The officer has been disqualified from participating in the program
based on his or her performance while working a special employment
or Department-procured outside employment assignment.

2. An officer will be suspended from working a Department-procured
outside employment assignment for a period of thirty (30) calendar
days if the officer was scheduled for a Department-procured outside
employment assignment and failed to work such assignment without
reasonable cause for such absence acceptable to the Employer (e.g., a
death in the family, an injury on duty or a change in the officer's regular
duty schedule).

3. An officer will be suspended from working a Department-procured
outside employment assignment for a petiod of ninety (90) calendar
days if the officer was scheduled for a Department-procured outside

120
employment assignment and failed to work such assignment without

advance notice to the Employer of his or her absence (i.e., a “no call/no

show”).
If an officer believes that he or she has been wrongfully declared ineligible
to work Department-procured outside employment, the officer shall submit
a “To-From-Subject Report” to the coordinator of the Department-procured
outside employment program no later than four (4) calendar days following
his or her receipt of notification of ineligibility. If the program coordinator’s
response is unsatisfactory to the officer, then the officer may initiate a
grievance at Step One of the grievance procedure set forth in Section 9.2 no
later than seven (7) of the officer's working days following his or her receipt
of such response.
. The Employer shall assign Department-procured outside employment
opportunities to eligible officers on a rotating basis.

The Employer shall publish any limitations it establishes on the number of
hours, tours or assignments that may be worked by officers in the program
and may restrict participation in the program to officers who are assigned to
certain Units or who have specialized knowledge, skills or abilities.

. The exclusive remedy for any incorrect assignment of Department-procured
outside employment shall be the assignment of future Department-procured
outside employment opportunities in a manner that corrects the error in
assignment.

. The parties recognize that the Department-procured outside employment
program is a new initiative for the Department. Therefore, the parties agree
to establish a labor-management committee to facilitate its implementation
and administration. The labor-management committee will be composed
of equal representation from the Department and the Lodge and will be
charged with the following responsibilities: monitoring and evaluating the
implementation and administration of the program; attempting to resolve any
disputes arising out of the program prior to invoking the formal grievance
procedure; and attempting to develop joint recommendations regarding the
program's modification, continuation, expansion or discontinuation. Any
joint recommendation by the committee to modify, continue, expand or
discontinue the program is subject to the approval of the Department and the
Lodge.

Notwithstanding any recommendation by the committee, the Department
may discontinue the program at its discretion. If the Department intends
to discontinue the program, the Department will timely provide the Lodge
with written notice of its intent and upon request will promptly meet with the
Lodge to discuss its rationale.

This memorandum of understanding shall be implemented as expeditiously
as possible following its execution.

121
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE
CITY OF CHICAGO
AND THE
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, CHICAGO LODGE NO. 7
REGARDING
RETIREE HEALTH CARE BENEFITS

‘The parties agree that the health care benefit provided to Officers who retire on or after age sixty
(60) pursuant to Section 25.2 of the parties’ collective bargaining agreement ("the Agreement") shall be
extended to Officers who retire on or after age fifty-five (55), subject to the following terms and
conditions:

A: Applicability

This memorandum of understanding applies only to any Officer who retires on or after age fifty-five
(55) with an effective date of retirement on or after January 1, 2015 and who intends to avail
himself/herself of the health care benefit provided to Officers who retire on or after age sixty (60) by
Section 25.2 of the Agreement.

B. Health Care Benefits Upon Retirement
1 Officers Who Retire on or After Age Sixty (60)

Officers who retire on or after age sixty (60) shal] continue to receive the health care benefit set forth
in Section 25.2 of the Agreement and may elect to have their final compensation paid in accordance with
Section (C). Any Officer who intends to exercise this option shall notify the Employer of his/her intent in
writing at the time he/she files for retirement and shall otherwise comply with any administrative
procedures established by the Employer to implement this provision, After an Officer files for retirement,
he/she may only rescind his/her election prior to the effective date of retirement or by any administrative
deadline established by the Employer, whichever date is earlier, Upon retirement, the Officer's election
becomes irrevocable,

2. Officers Who Retire on or After Age Fifty-Five (55) and Before Age Sixty (60)
Officers who retire on or after age fifty-five (55) and before age sixty (60) shall be eligible for the

health care benefit set forth in Section 25.2 of the Agreement, provided that the required number of eligible
Officers file for retirement in accordance with the following schedule:

 

Filing Deadline Effective Date of Retirement
(must be age 55 through 59)
01/01/2015 through 12/31/2015

 

01/01/2016 through 12/31/2016

10/01/2016, and each 10/01 |01/01/2017 through 12/31/2017, and each 01/01 through
thereafter 12/31 thereafter

 

 

122
* For retirements occurring in calendar year 2015, the 2014 filing deadline shall be
extended to December 1, 2014, provided: at least 100 Officers file for retirement by the December 1,
2014 date; and the effective date of retirement for those filing their retirement applications between
October 1, 2014, and December 1, 2014, is no carlier than March 1, 2015.

At least thirty (30) calendar days prior to each filing deadline, the Employer shall send notice to the Lodge
of the number of retirement applications filed to date and the name of each applicant and shall send notice
to each applicant of the number of retirement applications filed to date. If the requirement set forth in this
subsection is not satisfied, the Employer shall send notice to the Lodge and cach applicant that the
minimum threshold was not met within three (3) business days of the filing deadline, and such applicants
shall have the right to withdraw their filings for retirement within fifteen (15) business days from the date
of such notice.

Effective for retirements occurring after June 1, 2017, Officers retiring on or after age fifty-five (55)
and before age sixty (60) and who elect to participate in this benefit shall contribute two percent
(2%) of their annuity then being received pursuant to the provisions of the Policemen's Annuity and
Benefit Fund Act of the Ilinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/5-101 et seq.). Such Officers shall continue
to contribute this percentage contribution for as long as they receive the health care benefit set forth
in Section 25.2 of the Agreement.

C. Payment of Final Compensation Upon Retirement
1. Legally Required Final Compensation

Upon retirement, the Employer shall pay to cach eligible Officer or his/her estate if necessary any
compensation owed to such Officer in the form of wages earned, unused compensatory time granted
pursuant to the federal Fair Labor Standards Act ("FLSA"), unused elective time provided by the
Agreement (¢.g., furlough days, Baby Furlough Days and personal days) and any other final compensation
that may be legally owed to such Officer, except as provided by subsection (C2). Any wage increases that
are implemented as a result of negotiations, mediation or interest arbitration for a successor collective
bargaining agreement and that are effective prior to the Officer's date of retirement shall be applied
retroactively to his/her legally required final compensation paid pursuant to this subsection.

2. Non-FLSA Compensatory Time

Upon retirement, the Employer shall calculate the value of each Officer's accumulated non-FLSA
compensatory time (if any) based on the Officer's rate of pay in effect at the time of retirement. Any wage
increases that are implemented as a result of negotiations, mediation or interest arbitration for a successor
collective bargaining agreement and that are effective prior to the Officer's date of retirement shal] be applied
retroactively to the value of his/her non-ELSA compensatory time paid pursuant to this subsection.

As part of the officer's legally required final compensation, the Employer will pay to the Officer or
his/her estate the value of his/her non-FLSA compensatory time up to yet not exceeding $10,000.00,

On or before March | of the first calendar year following the date of the Officer's retirement, the
Employer shall pay to the Officer or his/her estate the value of his/her remaining non-FLSA compensatory
time up to yet not exceeding $15,000.00. If a remainder exists, the Employer shall also pay to the Officer
or his/her estate one-third of the value of the remainder.

123
On or before March | of the second calendar year following the date of the Officer's retirement, the
Employer shall pay to the Officer or his/her estate the value of his/her remaining non-FLSA compensatory
time up to yet not exceeding $20,000.00. If a remainder exists, the Employer shall also pay to the Officer
or his/her estate one-half of the value of the remainder.

On or before March | of the third calendar year following the date of the Officer's retirement, the
Employer shall pay to the Officer or his/her estate the value of any and all remaining non-FLSA

compensatory time.
D. Term of Memorandum of Understanding

‘The terms and conditions of this memorandum of understanding shall be subject to renegotiation by
the parties on or after June 30, 2017.

124
Attorneys and Counselors

300 South Wacker Drive Suite 3400 Chicago, IL 60606
Phone 312.986.0300 Fax 312.996.9192 franceek.com

&p FRANCZEK RADELET
“>

James C. FRANCZBK, Ja.
312.786.6110
jef@Ptrancrek.com

July 17, 2009

Mr. Joel A. D’Alba

Asher, Giter, Greenfield & D'Alba, Lrd.
200 West Jackson Boulevard, Suite 1900
Chicago, Iinois 60606

Re: Joint Pension Legislation Council
Dear Mr, D’Alba;

‘This letter confirms the agreement between the City of Chicago and the
Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago Lodge No. 7, to establish a Joint Pension
Legislation Council. As we have discussed, the Joint Pension Legislation Council
will be responsible for reviewing, researching and developing recommendations if
appropriate regarding any and all legislation impacting or otherwise related to the
Policemen’s Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago, Illinois. The parties have already
explored the issues of membership, legislative review procedures and scheduling and
agree to continue to discuss and ultimately decide upon the necessary features of the
Joint Pension Legislation Council, Finally, this letter confirms the parties’ intent
that the Joint Pension Legislation Council be established and fully operational prior
to the 2010 spring session of the 96° General Assembly,

Your acknowledgment and agreement is appreciated in the space provided
below.

Nery truly yours,

  

4 4
Hic, Y. brews,
C. Franezek, Jr. )
AGREED:

 

125
2007 NEGOTIATIONS
BETWEEN THE
Cry oF CHicaGo.
AND THE
FRATERNAL ORDER OF Police, CHICAGO LODGE NO. 7

 

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
FOR WORK DAY SCHEDULES

As Amended By the Parties on November 13, 2009

Amendments To Be Effective Operationally on January 10, 2010

With respect to (I) the Work Day Schedule; (II) Impasse Resolution and
Ratification Procedures for the Work Day Schedule and its implementation; and (III) the
modification of certain provisions of the collective bargaining agreement in order to
facilitate and implement the Work Day Schedule, the parties hereby agree as follows:

I. The Work Day Schedule

A.

Ten (10) Hour Work Day Schedule for District Rapid Response Cars.

1

‘The parties agree to pilot ¢ ten (10) hour work schedule in Districts 3,
7, 10, and 15 for officers assigned or detailed to the third watch Rapid
Response cars. This will result in a fifth watch. This schedule will be
the same as the previously piloted CHA Rotating schedule, except as
specifically modified herein.

The starting time for the Rapid Response Cars on the fifth watch will
be 1600.

Bach participating District shall have at least fifteen (15) Rapid
Response car positions which will be filled by the cighty percent
(80%)/twenty percent (20%) bidding process.

This pilot program will be discontinued at the end of the 2009
thirteenth police period.

lof 10

126
Ten (10) Hour Work Schedule in Detective Division Area Two (2) and
Juvenile Intervention and Support Center.

As

The parties agree to pilot a ten (10) hour work schedule in Detective
Division Area Two (2) and for Detectives assigned or detailed to the
Juvenile Intervention and Support Center. The schedule will be the
same as the pilot schedule currently in effect at the time of this
amendment.

‘The ten (10) hour schedule will not apply to Summary Investigation
Detectives, Review Investigation Detectives, Detectives assigned or
detailed to Administrative Desk Duty Assignments or Detectives
assigned or detailed to fixed day off groups.

‘The starting times for the ten (10) hour schedule will be 0800; 1800;
and 2200.

‘This pilot program will remain in effect through the 2010 thirteenth
police period and may thereafter be discontinued collectively or
individually by the Department in accordance with the procedure set
forth in Paragraph [1(F) and (G).

‘Ten (10) Hour Work Day Schedule in Districts 5 and 20.

i

The parties agree to pilot a ten (10) hour work schedule for officers
assigned or detailed ro Districts 5 and 20. The schedule will be the
same as the pilot schedule currently in effect at the time of this
amendment.

The ten (10) hour schedule will not apply to officers assigned or
detailed co the District Commander's administrative staff, Community
Policing, CAPS, school duties, officers on authorized foot posts, and
‘The starting times for the ten (10) hour schedule will be 0700; 1600;
and 2130. .

Officers who hold Desk, Lockup, and Watch Relief positions on the
First Watch will be considered successful bidders to a 1930 start time,
which falls within the plus or minus two (2) hour adjustment period
from the regularly designated 2130 starting time in accordance with
Section 20.7 of the Agreement, unless the officers elect to opt out of
their current position. Officers who successfully bid to Desk, Lockup,

20f 10

127
and Watch Relief positions on the First Watch will ordinarily, but
subject to the Department's. discretion, be assigned field duties
between 1930 and 0130.

‘This pilot program will remain in effect through the 2010 thirteenth
police period and may thereafter be discontinued collectively or
individually by the Department in accordance with the procedure set
forth in Paragraph II(F) and (G).

Ten (10) Hour Work Day Schedule for Officers Assigned or Detailed to the
Targeted Response Unit, Mobile Strike Force and the Special Functions
Group.

1.

The partics agree to pilot a ten (10) hour work schedule for officers
assigned or detailed to field duties in the Targeted Response Unit or
Mobile Strike Force and mutually agreed upon field functions within
the Special Functions Group. The schedule will, at the Department’s
option, have cither fixed or rotating consecutive days off. In the event
the Department selects fixed days off, at keast one of the fixed
consecutive days off shall be cither a Saturday or a Sunday.

This pilot program will remain in effect through the 2010 thirteenth

lice period and may thereafter be discontinued collectively or
individually by the Department in accordance with the procedure set
forth in Paragraph T1(F) and (G).

Six-Three Eight and One Half (8 1/2) Hour Schedule in Districts 8 and 13.

1.

The parties agree to pilot a six-three eight and one half (8 1/2) hour
work schedule for officers assigned or detailed to Districts 8 and 13.
This schedule will have three rotating days off.

‘The eight and one half (8 1/2) bour schedule will not apply to officers
assigned or detailed to the District Commander’s administrative staff,
Community Policing, CAPS, school dutics, authorized foot posts or
fixed day off groups.

The starting times for the six-three cight and one half (8 1/2) hour
schedule will be 0700; 1500; and 2200.

This pilot program will remain in effect through the 2010 thirteenth
police period and may thereafter be discontinued collectively or

3 0f 10

128
individually by the Department in accordance with the procedure set
forth in Paragraph II(F) and (G).

Four-Two Eight and One Half (8 1/2) Hour Schedule in Districts 1, 2, 3, 4,
6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25.

1

‘The parties agree to implement a four-two eight and one half (8 1/2)
hour work schedule for officers assigned or detailed to Districts 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25.
This schedule will have two rotating days off.

The eight and onc half (8 1/2) hour schedule will not apply to officers
assigned or detailed to the District Commander’s administrative staff,
Community Policing, CAPS, school duties, fixed posts ar the filtration
Plant or fixed day off groups.

The starting times for the four-two cight and one half (8 and 1/2)
hour schedule will be 0700; 1500; and 2200.

This work schedule will remain in effect through the thirteenth police
period of the calendar year in which the parties’ successor labor
agreement to the 2003-2007 current labor agreement expires [e.g., if
the successor labor agreement expires on June 30, 2012, then the
work schedule will remain in effect through the 2012 thirteenth police
period] and is subject to renegotiation upon such expiration with any
changes effective no earlier than the first police period of the calendar
year following such expiration [¢.g., if the successor labor agreement
expires on June 30, 2012, then the work schedule is subject to
renegotiation beginning July 1, 2012, and any changes to the work
schedule will become effective no earlier than the 2013 first police
period).

Four-Two Bight-and-One-Half Hour Schedule for Detectives Assigned or
Detailed to Areas 1, 3, 4 and 5.

1.

The parties agree to pilot a four-two cight-and-one-half hour work
schedule for Detectives assigned or detailed to Areas 1, 3, 4 and 5.
This schedule will have two rotating days off.

The four-two cight-and-one-half hour schedule will not apply to
Summary Investigation Detectives, Review Investigation Detectives,
Detectives assigned or detailed to Administrative Desk Duty
Assignments or Detectives assigned or detailed to fixed day off groups.

40f10

129
3. The starting times for the four-two cight-and-onc-half hour schedule
will be 0830; 1700; and 0001.

4. This pilot program will remain in effect through the 2010 thirteenth
police period and may thereafter be discontinued collectively or
individually by the Department in accordance with the procedure set
forth in Paragraph II(F) and (G).

All starting times may be adjusted plus or minus two (2) hours from the

designated starting times in accordance with Section 20.7 of the Agreement.

Officers will initially select their watches and be assigned day off groups.

Officers will then select their furloughs.

Furloughs will be selected by unit for the calendar years beginning January 1,
2010 and cach January thereafter in accordance with Section 23.2 of the

Agreement.

Ratification, Implementation and Dispute Resolution

A.

The implementation or continuation of the pilot programs or work schedules
described in Paragraph I is contingent upon the approval of such programs
by Unit 156A-Sergeants.

If approved, the Department will immediately announce the anticipated
implementation or continuation of the pilot programs or work schedules
described in Paragraph I, which will provide a sufficient period for affected
officers to bid into or out of the affected units. Officers will bid to the ten
(10) hour shifts and eight and onc half (8 1/2) hour shifts pursuant to Article
31, Officers assigned to the ten (10) and eight and one half (8 1/2) hour
shifts will be subject to the reverse seniority provisions of Sections 31.5 and
316.

A Joint Labor Management Committee shall continue to meet monthly for
the purpose of monitoring, reviewing, ascertaining and making
recommendations regarding the pilot programs and work schedules and
ptomptly addressing errors and omissions in the pilot programs and work
schedules, The Committee will continue to consist of the Commanding
Officer of the Management and Labor Affairs Section and the Lodges’
Grievance Committee Chairman (or their designees) and additional persons
designated by cach party up to a maximum of five (5) persons for each party.
At the end of cach police period, reports will continue tw be presented by

5 of 10

130
both the City and the Lodge to this Committee for the purpose of
monitoring and reviewing the pilot programs and work schedules,

The goals of the pilot schedules are to attempt to boost cmployce
productivity, reduce employee stress, reduce medical and IOD absences,
reduce automobile accidents, reduce overtime assignments, reduce response
time between radio assignments, reduce radio assignments pending, reduce
crime, reduce citizen complaints, improve service to the community, and
boost employee morale, The parties recognize that implementation of the
pilot schedules might not result in measurable improvements in cach of these

‘The Joint Labor Management Committee will mect promptly upon the
request of either party in order to make recommendations and attempt co
reach agreement by negotiations in good faith regarding the pilot schedules’
continuation, expansion, modification, or discontinuation, The Committee
shall have the authority to continue, modify, expand or terminate any of the
pilot schedules by mutual agreement. Any mutual decision to continue,
expand, modify, or discontinue pilot schedules by the Committee shall be
binding upon the parties, subject co ratification by the parties,

‘The pilot programs that are approved and implemented shall remain in effect
through the 2010 thirteenth police period and may thereafter be continued
either collectively or individually at the discretion of the Department. If the
Department intends to discontinue one (1) or more pilot programs, the
Department will provide the Lodge with written notice of its intent no later
than July 1, 2010 and upon request shall promptly meet with the Lodge to
discuss the rationale for its decision.

In the event the Lodge disagrees with the rationale for the Department's
decision and believes One (1) or more of the pilot programs identified by the
Department for discontinuation should be continued beyond the 2010
thirteenth police period, the dispute shall not be submitted to interest
arbitration and may only be resolved through the following dispute
resolution procedure:

1. Within five (5) business days of the meeting required by subsection
(BF), the Lodge shall submit a demand for arbitral review to the
Management and Labor Affairs Section. In the event that two (2) or
more bargaining units file a demand for arbitral review, the actions
shall be consolidated into the same proceeding. In the event that the
arbitrator believes he/she could not award complete relief among the
parties because a particular bargaining unit is not a party to the

6 of 10

131
proceedings, the arbitrator shall have the authority to order such other
bargaining unit to join the proceedings as either an involuntary
grievant or respondent.

2. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the execution of this memorandum
of understanding, the parties shall mutually select an arbitrator and
pre-schedule such arbitrator for a hearing beginning on or about
August 1, 2010.

3. The issue before the arbitrator shall be whether the Department was
unreasonable in deciding to discontinue a pilot program.

4. The arbitrator shall issue an abbreviated written decision and order
within ten (10) business days of the close of the hearing and shall issue
a full written decision and order thereafter.

5. ‘The arbitrator's written decisions and orders shall be binding on both

the Department and the Lodge, provided that the arbitrator does not
exceed his/her authority as defined in this memorandum of

understanding.

6. The parties shall share equally the fees and expenses of the arbitrator
and any other arbitration costs that are common to both parties. Each
party shall be responsible for compensating its own attorneys and
representatives.

7. The established time limits in this dispute resolution procedure may
onily be extended by mutual written agreement.

8. During the parties’ discussions and the impasse procedures, the pilot
programs shall continue in effect.

In the event a dispute arises out of the implementation or administration of

the work schedules described in Paragraph I, the parties may mutually agree

to attempt to resolve the dispute through mediation, or either party may
invoke the grievance and arbitration procedure set forth in the parties’ labor
agrecment.

7 of 10

132
Contract Modifications and Understandings Regarding the Implementation of the
Pilot Programs

Neen os Oe 1 eS ee
successor collective bargaining agreement for the duration of the pilot programs and
chedules, the following provisions and understandings shall be in effect:

A.

The normal tour for the ten (10) hour shift will be ten and one half (10 1/2)
hours, which includes a one half (1/2) hour uncompensated lunch

‘The normal tour for the cight and one half (8 1/2) hour shift will be nine (9)
hours, which inchudes a one half (1/2) hour uncompensated lunch period.
‘The parties agree and understand that if an officer is required to perform
work during the one half (1/2) hour meal period, the officer will receive
overtime compensation in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.

For officers working the ten (10) and cight and one half (8 1/2) hour
schedules, the Lodge waives the overtime provisions of Section 20.1 of the
Agreement insofar as that section requires payment of overtime for all hours
worked in excess of the normal work day of eight (8) hours. Overtime in
excess of the normal tour of duty will be compensated at the overtime rate.

Officers with straight day furloughs will be given the same number of straight

furlough days in the ten (10) and eight and onc half (8 1/2) hour schedules.

Officers with working day furloughs will have any remaining days converted

to hours. Where the conversion of working day furloughs to hours results in

a remainder of hours that is lower than the cight and one half (8 1/2) hour

tour of duty, officers may utilize compensatory time to attain a complete tour

of duty or, in the alternative, will forfeit the remainder hours.

Compensation for Designated Holidays is granted as follows:

1. Officers on the ten (10) hour shift will receive ren (10) hours of
holiday compensation for holidays occurring on their days off and will
receive ten (10) hours of compensation and five (5) hours of holiday
compensation when officers are required to work a ten (10) hour shift
on a holiday.

Officers on the eight and one half (8 1/2) hour shift will receive cight
and one half (8 1/2) hours of holiday compensation for holidays
occurring on their days off and will receive cight and one half (8 1/2)
hours of compensation and four and one quarter (4 1/4) hours of
holiday compensation when officers are required to work an cight and
one half (8 1/2) hour shift on a holiday.

8 of 10

133
2. Officers on the ten (10) hour shift whose regular day off coincides
with an established holiday, and who are required to work a regular
tour of duty ten (10) hours on thar holiday, will be credited with
twenty-five (25) hours of compensatory time and five (5) hours of
compensatory time or additional pay, as the officcr clects.

Officers on the eight and one half (8 1/2) hour shift whose regular day
off coincides with an established holiday, and who are required to
work a regular tour of duty eight and one half (8 1/2) hours on that
holiday, will be credited with twenty-one and one quarter (21 1/4)
hours of compensatory time and four and one quarter (4 1/4) hours of
compensatory time or additional pay, as the officer elects.

3. In the event that an officer covered by this agreement is required to
attend court on his or her regular day off and that day thar is also a
holiday, the officer will be compensated at a rate of double-time for
the minimum set forth in 20.5 or double-time for the actual hours
worked, whichever is greater, plus compensatory time or additional
pay in an amount equal to the normal tour of duty, as the officer
elects.

For those officers working a ten (10) hour schedule, a personal day, if used,
will be worth a tour of duty, ten (10) hours, and baby furlough days will be
worth cight (8) hours cach. An officer assigned to the ten (10) hour schedule
who wishes to use a baby furlough day will be required to use an additional
two (2) hours of compensatory time.

For those officers working an cight and one half (8 1/2) hour schedule, a
personal day, if used, will be worth a tour of duty, cight and one half (8 1/2)
hours, and baby furlough days will be worth cight (8) hours each, An officer
assigned to the cight and one half (8 1/2) hour schedule who wishes to’use a
baby furlough day will be required to use an additional one half (1/2) hour of
compensatory time.

For officers working a ten (10) hour schedule, an officer who is directed to
perform substantially all- the duties and assumes substantially all the
responsibilities of a Desk Sergeant for more than four (4) hours within a
single ten (10) hour tour of duty shall be paid at a D-3 rate consistent with
his or her own tenure for a ten (10) hour tour of duty, or for the time spent,
which ever is greater. An officer who is directed to perform substantially all
the duties and assumes substantially all the responsibilities of a Desk Sergeant

9 of LO

134
for four (4) hours or less shail be paid at a D-3 rare consistent with his or her
own tenure for the actual hours worked.

G. The number of District Desk, District Lockup, and District Watch Relief

positions that will be subject to bid in Districts 5 and 20 shall be as follows:
005 3 6 12
020 3 3 9

Chicago Police Department Fraternal Order of Police,

Chicago Lodge No. 7

Jody Weis Mark P. Donahue

Superintendent of Police President

pares. /6ALVCF Ducd:_ fo AAT Ot

10 of 10

135
  

{at ow Preansit
‘BILL DOUGHERTY

dat Vc8 Promataet
FRANK J. DINAARIA

Beg ew Prottoot
GREGORY BELLA

Nocoring Soewary
SSONEY ML. DAVIS

Frorcat Secromy
RICHARD L. AGUILAR:

Teeenurar
JOHN T CAPPARELLE

Sargmants Ad Aires
BILL BURNS:

JAMES E. MORUARTY, JR
KENNETH L, WATT

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

(CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412 WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD * CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 1607-1521
PHONE: 912-733-7776 + PAX: 312-733-1387

  
   
 

January $, 2010

Commander Donald J. O"Neill
City of Chicago, Dept. of Police

and Labor Affairs Section
3510 South Michigan Avenue, 4* Floor
Chicago, IL. 60653

RE: Amendment to Work Schedule Agreement
Dear Cmdr. O'Neill;

The purpose of this letter is to memorialize our agreement to
amend the November 16, 2009, Memorandum of Understanding for Work
Day Schedules as it pertains to officers working an 8 % hour day.
Specifically, it is agreed that page 3 sec. E (3) and page 4, section F (3)
will be amended from the specified 1500 hour starting time to a 1530
hour starting time for the 3" watch. This amendment does not alter in
anyway the Department's right to change the 1530 hours starting time by
no more than 2 hours without incurring an extra pay obligation pursuant
to section 20.7 of the collective bargaining agreement.

If this letter is an accurate statement of our agreement, please sign
your name below to indicate your agreement.

Sincerely,

 

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS

136
nome
(WAN F ONE
v9 Pome

(Wh DOUOrRTY

Na vee Aen
PoI0e & CaUnen

ew nce
GRBOORY BELLA

(roy Bary
IEMY Gane

feanetteoney
FROMM | AGUILAR
‘aan

20 (CAPRI

depen tide
BAL OURNS

‘nMtes © MORITA
nani, vent

wean Beltre
Wid MLA

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
CHICAGO LODGE #7

{1418 WRT WASNT BLY AND» CHERUAGO, LIND WPT NADL
PON NBARSTM PAX: FRIDAY

Jaary 3, 2010

‘Commueder Donald J. O'Neill

City of Chicago, Dept of Potice
‘Managenont and Labor Affairs Section
3510 South Michigan Avenue, 4" Flooe
Chicago, IL 60653

Ks Change uf Schedule
Dear Cte. Nell

The purpose of this leer is to confirm our discwxsions and
agteemen! coacerning T.A.R.A. training when it occurs during the new
work schedule, We have agrved that an ofloer who is wibeduled for
wetk long (5 consecutive days) T.A.R.A. tvining will have his or bor
days off changed to Sunday und Saturday of the sume week for the week
fn which T.A.R.A teaining isto take place, ‘This cherge will not result in
the payment of compenuation of overtime, Upon the completion of
TARA. training the affected uflcer(e} will be returned to thelr original
day off groups.

WF this letter is an accurate statermert of our discussion and
‘grvement,pleive indicate this by signing your hare below,

‘ian

‘Thomas J. Pleines
‘TIP
oe William Dougherty
Mark Donahue

DATE:_§ Jaw Zeve

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS

137
-@

Benno
wink P CONANUE

“at ince Merete
ont Yee Poster
PRADIR 4 DMARIA

be vce Prenat
GREGORY BELLA

evening Coctey
SOREY Mt DANS
Secsrtny
RICHARD L AGULAR
JOHN CAPRARELL

LL BURNS
ARMIES E MORIARTY, 2.
RENNETH |. WATT

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412 WEST WASHINGTON MOULRVARD « CHICAGO, ILLINOIS ensr-182¢
PHONE: 312-738-7796 SIETANIT

 

April 12, 2010

‘Commander Donald O'Neill
Manegement and Labor Affairs Section
City of Chicago, Department of Police
3510S. Michigan Ave.

Chicago, (L. 60653

Re: District Desk Officer Bid Positions’
Work Day Schedules

Dear Commander O'Neill:

“The purpose of this letter is 1 confirm and memorialize ovr discussions and
agreements regarding the increased number of bid positions for District Desk which will
be availabic under the next collective bargaining agreement.

By way of background and to put this matter in the appropriate context, 4 brief
recitation of certain facts is necessary. During negotintions for a successor agroement to
the 2003-2007 agreement. the parties spent a great dcal of time negotiating a new Work
Day Schedule, Those efforts resulted in an agreement signed by the perties on
November 16, 2009. The last puragraph of the agreement specifies the number of Dexk
positions in the 00S and 020 Districts will be three (3) in cach district.

\y, the purties negotiated an increase in the number of bid positions
for the District Desk inall districts except 001, 007, 009, 018 and O19. This agreement
therefore increased the number of bid positions for District Desk im the 005 and 020
districts from three (3) to six (6). Upon ratification of Arbitrator Bean's award by the
City Council, these new bid positions will be opened for bid in accordance with the
provisions of Section 23.9 in each affected district.

If the foregoing is an accurate account of our discussions and agreements, please

80 indicate by signing your name below,
‘Thomas J. Picines
Gener! Counsel
TIPiom
AGREED:

O'Neill
Wet ECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS
Se

138
e

Pome
MARK P OONAHUE

et eo Prasat
BILL COURHERTY

dee ice Pronoun
FRANK J OMARIA

De Woe Preset
GREGORY BELLA

Aavcorny Herotary
SIDNEY M.OAVES:

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412. WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD + CHICAGO, 1LINOKS saney.1921
PWONK: SEL 7SE-77I VAN: FD 7SEMT

March 15, 2010

Commander Donald O'Neill
Management and Labor Affairs Section
City of Chicago, Depariment of Polive
3510'S. Michigan Ave... Suite 4005
Chicago, It, 60653

Dear Communder O'Neilt:

During the negotiations for a successor to the 2003-2007 ugreemen, the parties
mutually acknowledged the need ty make certain amendments to Article 23, Seuiority, Section
23.1 — Definiion and Applaxniun, Specifically, the parties agreed 2 amend 22,1, subsections B
and C, to update and clarify language.

‘Ht was agreed that (hese amendments will not Wave a retroactive effect. Any officer
whose continuous length of service (seiviority) had beox changed die to suspensions under
subparagraph B(1) or abyences from duty under parugraph B(3), would not have his seniority
dote recalculated as # resutt of these amendments. Conversely, an officer whose seniority date
should have beon adjusted, pursuant to subparagraphs B( 1) or B(3), but was nut so adjusted,
will oot now be adjusted. ‘The Department hiad the right to make the required adjwstinents under
the original lunguaye of Section 23.1 andl IF it did not do so then, it has waived its right to do so

now.

Wo regards to subparagraph B(2), the parties ugreed that leaves of abscnec from the
“Department's” service would clarify that an officer would not cntinae to ncere seniority for
purposes of this section, by working for the City of Chicago (the Employer) in 9 non-law
enforcement position, Also, in regards to “suspensions of more than thirty (30) days”, when an
officer serves such « suspension, the entire period of suspension will be deducted frun hin
seniority. However, any suspension time which is satisfied hy the use of compensatory time
through the granting of options, witl not be deducted from the officer's seniority.

Finally, the provisions of Section C no longer have any applicability and the
continuation of that section would serve no purpose,

Hf the above accurately reflocts curr agreements rd the purpose of these nmendiieats,
please so indicate by signing your name below,

 

‘J. Pleines
General Counsel
Tien
ec: David Johnson
James Franezek
Greg Bella
William Dougherty

 

THE ELECTED eS CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS:

139
FRANCZEK RADELET

Attorneys and Counselors
300 South Wacker Drive | Suite 3400 ' Chicago, IL 60606
Phone 312.986.0300 | Fux 312.986.9192 ' franczek.com James C. Pranczex, Ju.
312.786.6110
jef@efranceck.com
April 16, 2010
Mr. Joel A. D’Alba

Asher, Gittler, Greenfield & D'Alba, Ltd.
200 West Jackson Boulevard, Suite 1900
Chicago, Illinois 60606

Re: Disciplinary Investigations
Dear Mr, D'Alba:

This letter confirms the Employer's representations during negotiations
regarding the amendments to Sections 6.1 and 6.2 of the parties’ collective
bargaining agreement (“the Agreement”).

 

Throughout these negotiations, the parties discussed the legality and
practicality of a policy requiring ence members to submit to audio
recording and the impact such policy may have on the credibility and integrity of the
investigative process. During these discussions, the Lodge articulated legitimare and
reasonable concerns regarding the consequences of a non-Department member's
refusal ro consent to audio recording, including the distinctions between audio-
recorded and writeen statements and how such distinctions if present may influence
the investigation. In response to these concerns, the Employer explained that the
Independent Police Review Authority (“IPRA”) and the Internal Affairs Division
TAD”) were fiemly committed to obtaining audio-recorded statements from non-
Department members within the confines of the law. Moreover, the Employer has
invited the Lodge to review the protocols, procedures and training materials for
audio recording non-Department members as they are developed and to submit
recommendations as may be appropriate. This letter affirms such invitation and the
Employcr’s commitment to collaborate with the Lodge as these policies arc
implemented.

140
FRANCZEK RADELET Mr. Joel A. D’Alba
Attorneys and Counselors April 16, 2010
Page 2

Tl. Olficer’s Right To Edit and Correct Statements Made During
facies ioenlos

‘This letter also confirms the parties’ discussions regarding an officer's right to
edit and correct statements made during disciplinary investigations. Specifically, the
Employer agrees that the amendments to Sections 6.1 and 6.2 regarding the method
of recording statements do not modify the current policy or practice governing the
editing and correcting of starcments. The Employer also recognizes that this policy
or practice may need to be modified to accommodate the new method of recording,
and thar such modifications will only become effective upon the written consent of
the Lodge.

Your acknowledgement and agreement with the understandings sct forth
above is appreciated in the space provided below.

James C, Francack, Jr.

AGREED;

 

141
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

200 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 3400 | CHICAGO, IL 60606
Te 312.986.0300 | F) 912.986.9192 | WWWLPRANCZEK.COM

JAMES ©. FRANCZEK, JR.
312.786.6110
jeft@franczek.com

September 3, 2014

Dean C. Angelo, Sr.

President

Fraternal Order of Police,
Chicago Lodge No. 7

1412 West Washington Blvd.

Chicago, IL 60607

Re; Department Vehicles
Dear President Angelo:

The purpose of this letter is to confirm our discussions with respect to the Police
Department's motor vehicle fleet and the City’s current intentions with respect to the purchase
of additional vehicles to the Department's vehicle fleet.

Both the Lodge and the City recognize their shared interest in having a fleet of vehicles
of sufficient size and flexibility to continue to allow the Police Department to fulfill its mission.
To further their shared interests, the parties agree to establish a Police Vehicle Committee, to
which each party shall appoint three (3) members. This Committee shall be formed and shall
hold its initial meeting within ninety (90) days of the final date of ratification of this Agreement,
At least one of the City-appointed members of the Committee shall be an employee of the
Police Department, one shall be an employee of the Department of Fleet and Facility
Management and one shall be an employee of the Office of Budget and Management. The
Committee shall meet at least once every six months, or more frequently upon mutual
agreement. The City-appointed members of the Committee shall share with the Lodge-
appointed members the existing protocols with respect to scheduled repair, maintenance and
retirement of vehicles. The Lodge-appointed members shall be permitted to make advisory
recommendations and suggestions with respect to enhancing such protocols, to which the City-
appointed members shall respond. The Lodge and the City mutually acknowledge the
importance of having a safe and reliable fleet of vehicles in the Police Department. The
Committee shall consider the issue of mandatory removal of vehicles from the Patrol Division,
in light of the practices followed by other city, state and governmental law enforcement
agencies, In addition, the City recognizes it is a priority for it to purchase additional Patrol
Division vehicles, absent exigent circumstances,

Both parties acknowledge that the number of Patrol Division vehicles purchased in any
given calendar year necessarily depends on numerous factors, including but not limited to:

142
FRANCZEKRADELET Dean Angelo, Sr
ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS mes:

available funding; the needs for other categories of Police Department vehicles, such as canine
unit vehicles, squadrols, van cell cargo vans, prisoner transport vehicles and unmarked vehicles;
and the parameters of multi-year purchase schedules, which may make it more (or less)
economical to purchase vehicles in a particular sequence or time frame, Subject to these caveats,
the City has represented to the Lodge its intention to purchase four hundred (400) vehicles for
the Police Department before the close of 2014 and has advised the Lodge of its intention to
purchase, on average, two hundred (200) Patrol Division vehicles each year during the term of
this Agreement, beginning in 2015. During the first quarter of each calendar year beginning in
2015, the Committee shall meet and the City shall share with the Lodge-appointed Committee
members its progress in attaining this goal. In any year where the City does not reach this goal,
upon request the City-appointed members shall meet with the Union-appointed members to
discuss the reason(s) for not attaining the goal.

Your acknowledgement and agreement is appreciated in the space provided below,

Very truly yours,
& rangeh b.

James C. Franczek, Jr.

 

143
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 3400 I CHICAGO, Il. 60606
‘Te 312.996.0300! F: 312.946.9192 | WWW.FRANCZEK.COM

JAMES C. FRANCZEK, JR.
312.786.6110
jefi@franceck.com
September 3, 2014

Dean C. Angelo, Sr.

President

Fratemal Order of Police,
Chicago Lodge No. 7

1412 West Washington Blvd.

Chicago, IL 60607

Re: Field Training Officer P
Dear President Angelo:
This letter confirms our agreement with respect to the Field Training Officer program.

Within thirty (30) days of the ratification of this Agreement, the Department and the
Lodge shall each designate representatives to comprise a Labor Management Committee to
review and study ways in which to improve and strengthen the Field Training Officer program.
Within ninety (90) days of the first meeting, this Committee shall prepare recommendations in
writing with respect to its suggestions for the improvement and strengthening of the FTO
program, and submit them to the Superintendent. If the Superintendent agrees with the
recommendations, or any of them, the Department shall implement them on a timely basis.

If the above accurately reflects our agreement, please so indicate by signing your name
below,

Very truly yours,
e “frangeh jo,

James C. Franezek, Jr.

 

144
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 3400 | CHICAGO, IL. 60606
“Th 312, 986.0300 | Fr 312,986,9192 | WWWLERANCZEK.COM

JAMES C, FRANCZEK, JR,
312.786.6110
icf@franczck.com

September 3, 2014

Dean C. Angelo, Sr.

President

Fraternal Order of Police,
Chicago Lodge No. 7

1412 West Washington Blvd.

Chicago, IL 60607

Re: City of Chicago and Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago Lodge No. 7
Dear President Angelo:
Confirming our conversations, the parties understand and agree as follows:

L The City agrees that economic increases, including but not limited to, wage
allowance, salary and pay increases agreed to by the parties shall be retroactive to July 1,
2012; provided, however, that all overtime pay for all overtime, within the meaning of
Sections 20.] and 20.2, worked between July 1, 2012, at 12:01 a.m., through June 30,
2013, at 11:59 p.m., inclusive, shall not be eligible for any retroactive increase or
adjustment

25 Any bargaining unit member who retires, dies, or voluntarily leaves the
bargaining unit between June 30, 2012, and approval by the City Council of Chicago of
any successor collective bargaining agreement between Fraternal Order of Police
Chicago Lodge No. 7 and the City of Chicago, shal! receive all increases in economic
benefits including, but not limited to, wage, allowance, salary, pay and/or bonus to
which he/she would have been entitled during the period the member was employed
between June 30, 2012, and leaving the bargaining unit as described; provided, however,
that all overtime pay for all overtime within the meaning of Sections 20.1 and 20.2,
worked between July 1, 2012, at 12:01 am., through June 30, 2013, at 11:59 p.m.
inclusive shall not be eligible for any retroactive increase or adjustment,

3. If retroactive payments are not made within seventy-five (75) days of City
Council ratification, ail officers on the payroll at any time on or after July 1, 2012 shall
be entitled to interest at four-and-one-half percent (4.5%) per annum until fully paid,
provided that any failure is within the City or Department’s control. Any disputes shall
be resolved through the parties’ grievance procedure.

145
FRANCZEKRADELET Dean Angelo, Sr.
ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS ee

If the above accurately reflects our agreement, please so indicate by signing your name

below.
Very truly yours,
0 rangeh zs
James C. Franczek, Jr.
AGREED:

AE

146
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 3409 | CHICAGO, IL 60606
‘T. 312.986.0300 | F: 312.986.9192 | WWW.FRANCZEK.COM

JAMES C. FRANCZEK, JR.
312.786.6110
September 3, 2014 ist@h ‘cal
Dean C. Angelo, Sr.
President
Fraternal Order of Police,

Chicago Lodge No. 7
1412 West Washington Blvd.
Chicago, IL 60607

Re: Section 8.4
Dear President Angelo:

This letter confirms the parties” understandings and agreements with respect to the use of
bargaining history over Section 8.4.

During the negotiations for this Agreement, both the Employer and the Lodge advanced
certain proposals to modify Section 8.4. With the sole exception of the agreed-upon
modification to Section 8.4 pertaining to the length of time reprimands and suspensions of from
one (1) to five (5) days may stay on an officer's disciplinary history, both parties agreed to
withdraw their respective proposals to modify Section 8.4. We have mutually agreed that no
significance whatsoever should be attached to the fact that either party made such proposals and
subsequently withdrew them and that neither party shall introduce evidence of the making
and/or withdrawal of these proposals in any arbitration or administrative hearing for the purpose
of interpreting Section 8.4.

Your acknowledgement and agreement is appreciated in the space provided below.

Very truly yours,

jp 0 jrewgeh jo,

James C. Franezek, Jr.

 

147
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
RE: HEALTH CARE PLAN - FOP LODGE 7

This Memorandum confirms our understandings and agreements relating to changes
to the PPO and HMO medical plans.

L Changes to the PPO

A. Effective January 1, 2015, the following changes to the PPO Plan covering
the bargaining unit represented by the Lodge shall be implemented:

1) The $600 per year “wellness benefit” is eliminated and shall be replaced
by the Preventive Care Benefit in accordance with the United States
Preventive Services Task Force Level A and B recommended services.
There is no cap on the dollar value of this benefit, which shall be 100%
of the maximum allowable charges without payment of a co-payment or
coinsurance, provided the services are provided in accordance with the
recommendations of the USPSTF and are provided in-network. There is
no coverage for services provided out of network.

2) Outpatient Speech and Occupational Therapy services provided in-
network shall no longer be subject to co-insurance or the deductible and
shall, instead, be subject to a $20 co-payment per visit. Services related
to acquisition of function will become a covered benefit. These services
will continue to be subject to medical necessity review as they are today.

3) The exclusion of coverage for self-inflicted injuries is eliminated.

4) Bargaining unit members, their spouses and eligible dependents shall be
eligible to participate, on a voluntary basis, in the Diabetes and
Maternity Management Programs.

5) The $1.5 million lifetime maximum is eliminated.

B. Effective January 1, 2017, the following changes to the PPO Plan covering
the bargaining unit represented by the Lodge shall be implemented:

1) The Blue Choice Nested Network, with the following features: hospitals
in the Blue Choice Network shall comprise Tier 1; the individual Tier 1
deductible will be $300; the family Tier 1 deductible will be $900; the
individual out of pocket maximum will be $1,000; the family out of
pocket maximum will be $2,000; physician office visit co-payments will
be $0 for ACA preventive services, $20 for primary care physicians, $30
for specialist physicians: these co-payments do not apply to the
deductible, but are applied to the out of pocket maximum; $150
Emergency Room co-payment; co-insurance remains at 90%/10% except

148
2)

4

4)

that subscriber share applies. “Subscriber share” means that the
discounts that Blue Cross Blue Shield obtains from its contracted
providers are shared between the plan sponsor and the covered member
(the Subscriber). When claims are adjusted, the amount of any estimated
discount is subtracted from the allowable amount before the plan of
benefits is applied.

Tier 2 retains existing provisions with respect to deductibles ($350 for
individual and $1,050 for family) and out of pocket maximums ($1,500
for individual and $3,000 for family); physician office visits shall be
subject to the $0/$25/$35 co-payments for preventive services/primary
care physicians/specialist physicians ; these co-payments do not apply to
the deductible, but are applied to the out of pocket maximum; $150
Emergency Room co-payment; and co-insurance (with subscriber share)
is 75%/25%. “Subscriber share” means that the discounts that Blue
Cross Blue Shield obtains from its contracted providers are shared
between the plan sponsor and the covered member (the Subscriber).
When claims are adjusted, the amount of any estimated discount is
subtracted from the allowable amount before the plan of benefits is

applied.

The provisions with respect to out of network services remain
unchanged, except the Emergency Room co-payment is $150.

The Emergency Room co-payment(s) referenced above shall continue to
be waived if the individual is admitted as an in-patient.

Medically necessary specified organ transplants and bariatric surgery
must be-performed at a Blue Cross “Center of Distinction” to be
covered. The Employer shall provide to the Lodge and officers a list of
“Centers of Distinction”, including the specific procedures for which
they are recognized, and shall provide sixty (60) days’ advance, written
notice of any change in such list, to the extent the City has been provided
with such notice.

Medically necessary out-patient MRI, PET and CT scans will be paid at
100°% if the scan is obtained at a free-standing (non-hospital) facility and
not billed by_a hospital; otherwise subject to the deductible and
90°%/10% co-insurance. All scans are subject to pre-authorization by the
entity designated for this purpose by the Employer. The Employer shall
provide to the Lodge and officers a list of approved free-standing
facilities and shall provide sixty (60) days’ advance, written notice of any
change in such list, to the extent the City has been provided with such
notice.

Medically necessary outpatient diagnostic laboratory tests performed by

an independent in-network lab (a non-hospital, such as Quest) and not
billed by a hospital shall be paid by the Plan at 100%; otherwise subject

149
to deductible and 90%/10% co-insurance. Coverage for such tests not
performed by such providers remain subject to the deductible and co-
insurance level for the applicable Tier. The Employer shall provide to
the Lodge and officers a list of approved in-network labs and shall
provide sixty (60) days’ advance, written notice of any change in such
list, to the extent the City has been provided with such notice.

5) Prescription drugs: after third refill at retail, subsequent refills are
obtained either through mail order at the applicable co-payment
schedule or, if the subsequent refills are obtained at retail, the member
will pay double the co-payment at retail. Provisions of the Caremark
Advanced Control Formulary (or its successor) apply. The Employer
shall provide the Lodge and officers with the specific provisions of the
Advanced Control Formulary (or its successor) and shall provide sixty
(60) days’ advance, written notice of any change in the Advanced
Control Formulary (or its successor), to the extent the City has been
provided with such notice.

I. Changes to the HMO:

1) Effective January 1, 2017, the schedule of co-payments for physician office
visits will be $25 for a primary care physician and $35 for a specialist.

2) Effective January 1, 2017, the Emergency Room co-payment is $150. The

Emergency Room co-payment(s) referenced above shall continue to be
waived if the individual is admitted as an in-patient.

150
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE
CITY OF CHICAGO DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
AND THE
FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE CHICAGO LODGE NO. 7

The Chicago Police Department (“Department”), as part of and empowered by the
community, is committed to protect the lives, property, and rights of all people, to maintain
order, and to enforce the law impartially. The Department will provide quality police service
in partnership with other members of the community. To fulfill the Department's mission, it
will strive to attain the highest degree of ethical behavior and professional conduct at all
times. This, the Department’s mission statement, embodies the essential purpose of the
Chicago Police Department, to serve and protect. To achieve this mission, the Department
must maintain proper staffing levels to effectively deploy manpower and provide protection to
members of the public. Moreover, sufficient manpower is a critical component of ensuring
Police Officer safety. However, the Department recognizes the countervailing concerns of its
Police Officers regarding the use of elective time. Use of elective time allows Police Officers to
cope with job related stress and spend quality time with family and friends.

Accordingly, for Police Officers assigned to District Law Enforcement, the parties
agree that the Department shall comply with the following Elective Time (compensatory time,
personal days and baby furlough days) requests, the approval of which shall not be
unreasonably denied:

1) Furlough and related furlough extensions will be granted in accordance with
Department directives.

2) Family Medical Leave Act — intermittent leave as required by the Act.

3) Personal Days submitted no later than ten (10) days prior to the requested day off will
be approved so long as the granting of the Personal Day does not adversely affect
Department operations. Denial of use of a Personal Day must be made three (3) days
prior to the requested date to allow for tour of duty exchange options. Any dispute
stemming from multiple timely Personal Day requests submitted by Police Officers on
the same watch will be resolved by seniority.

4) All other elective time (baby furlough days, vacation days, and compensatory time)
submitted no later than seven (7) days prior to the requested day off, but no earlier
than thirty-five (35) days prior to the requested day off, will be granted in seniority
order. A Police Officer whose timely elective time request is denied will be notified a
minimum of three (3) days in advance of the requested day off to allow the Police
Officer to utilize the tour of duty exchange option.

5) Day Off Holiday requests submitted no later than seven (7) days prior to the requested
day off, but no earlier than thirty-five (35) days prior to the requested day off will be
given priority and granted in seniority order. A Police Officer whose timely Day Off
Holiday request is denied will be notified five (5) days in advance of the requested day
off. The tour of duty exchange option is not available for holidays. Unit

151
Commanders/Commanding Officers will ensure that a notice informing Police Officers
of the day off holiday request procedures will be placed in the CO Book as needed.

6) Nothing precludes the Unit Commanders/Commanding Officers from determining a
minimum set percentage of Police Officers on each watch in cach district who may be
granted the use of Elective Time. The Department and the Lodge agree to form a
Labor Management Committee for the purpose of establishing a minimum set
percentage of officers who will be given an option for the use of Elective Time.

7) Nothing contained in this Memorandum of Understanding will modify the current
policy or practices which govern the use and awarding of Elective Time, except as
expressly provided for herein.

8) The Department continues to retain the right to cancel all days off for Police Officers
by district or unit when warranted, as it has in the past, due to exigent circumstances.

Each quarter, the Department agrees to provide the Lodge with the number of Police

Officers on each watch in each district, including the number of Police Officers who were on
furloughs, OD and non-IOD, and the number of Police Officers who requested and were
granted the use of Elective Time and will make every reasonable effort to determine officers
who were denied the use of Elective Time.

City of Chicago, Department of Police Fraternal Order of Police, Chicago Lodge

No.7

152
PHONE: SID-739-7776 + FAN: D127 EMT

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
CHICAGO LODGE #7
M412 WENT WASHINGTON BOULEVARD + CHICAGO, ILLINOUS 60007-1821

ves
DEAN ANGELO, SR.

September 3, 2014
1° Vee Premssert
FRAY CASIAND, J. dames C. Franczek, Jr, Esq.
x Franceck Radetet
ue ean Wi
ro 20 Sia Weeter Dros Bote 308
TO Vice Prenat
cen Re: Bomb Technician Work Schedule
Dear Mr. Franczek:
GREG BELLA
‘The Lodge and the Chicago Police Department mutually acknowledge the critical
iiaieh inated importance that the job duties of Bomb Technicians have to the safety of the citizens of the
KEVIN. KLMER City of Chicago. In recognition of the foregoing, the parties agree that, within ninety (0) days
‘of the ratification of this Agreement, the Department and the Lodge shalt exch designate
Teens representatives to comprise a Labor Management Committee to review and study ways in

Ose T CAPPARELL) Which fo Improve the work schedule for Bomb Technictans, consistent with the operational
oes of the Foes Deparieen. The Conus sel most upon ret of ober party and

mt romuet shall prepare recommendations in writing with respect to its suggestions for the improvement

WILLIAM J. NOLAN of the Bomb Technician work schedule, and submit them to the Superintendeat. If the
‘Superintendent agrees with the recommendations, of any of them, the Department shall

Secptares AC dune Implement them.

‘BILL BURNS

‘AL PRANCIB, JR. If the ubow reflects at, Indicate

y ry sash . ¢ accurately oUF agreement, please 10 by signing your

Tue Craeoman

eumne Very truly yours,

me Leathe lL,

BAN C ANGELO. JR. Base: a

MARK P DONAHUE
PATRICK WW. OUCKHORN

SERGIO ESCOBEDO

KATHEENL GANAGAN = AGREED:

MICHAEL P GARZA
See Zformoc-funt 0) ome!
TOM LONERGAN dames C.F de, Bog,

KEVIN MCNULTY
TIM MORIARTY

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS
2

153
DEAN ANGELO, 98.

1 Vw Presto
RAY CABIAND, JR,

7 Ven Prewenent
FRANK J DIMARIA

2 Vor Preseiner
DANIEL D GORMAN

Racontng Secretory
GREG BELA

Pomc
KEVIN, KLMER

JOHN T. CAPPARELL)

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE

CHICAGO LODGE #7

1412 WEST WASHINGTON BOULEVARD + CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60107-1121
PMO: SE2-T35-7778 + PANS S12?

September 3, 2014

James C. Prancaek, Jr. Bag.
Francack Radelet

300 South Wacker Drive: Suite 1400
Chicago, 1. 60606

Re: Honor Guard
‘Dear Mr. Franceek:

This letter confirms the parties’ understandings and agreements with respect to the
Honor Guard, The Lodge and the Department mutually acknowledge the importance of the
activities of the Honor Guard as representatives of the Chicago Police Department, its
continuing accomplishments and its contributions to the reputation of the City of Chicago
throughout the coustry, For these reasons, the Honor Guard and its members shall receive an
appropriate level of support, effective January 1, 2015, as set forth in greater detail below.

Officers who are members of the Honor Guard who are scheduled to work on a day
‘on which the Honor Guard has been designated to perform duties at an event, including any
approved day of travel to and from the evemt when the event ts located outside of the local
area, shall be exewed from their regular duties without loxs of pay, Officers shalt mot be
‘entitled to any additional compensation when such activities fall on a day they are not
scheduled to work, Whea Officers who are members of (he Honor Guard have been approved
to travel out of town for an Honor Guard event, they shall be eligible for reimbursement of
travel, lodging, meals and incidental expenses in accordance with the City of Chicago Travel
Guidelines in effect for City employees. Recognizing that from time to time additional
eapsnan ar nencmarty nad lgleotsly inured bythe Honor Guard with respect to

equipment, ete, im order to carry out its functions, the City agrees to

ce enkamcne tory thousand dollars (530,000), on an annual basis, beginning January
1, 2014, to reimburse the Guard for such expenditures, Within thirty (30) days of ratification
of thes Agreement, the Police Departimeut shall develop and promulgate protocols and forms
to implement the reimbursement proce ss.

 

‘Your acknowledgment and agreement in the space provided below is apprectated.

Lncpetl,

Dean C, Angelo, Sr,
AGREED:

Aine Soed om hit

THE ELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF CHICAGO'S PATROL OFFICERS

&

154
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 3400 | CHICAGO, IL 60606
Tr 312.986.0300 | F: 512.986.9192 | WWWFRANCZEK.COM

JAMES C. FRANCZEK, JR.
312.786.6110
jef@franczek.com
September 3, 2014
Joseph M. Burns
Jacobs, Burns, Orlove & Hernandez
150 North Michigan Avenue
Suite 1000
Chicago, IL 60601

Re: Capitalization of “Officer”
Dear Mr. Burns:

This letter sets forth the parties’ agreement with respect to capitalization of the term
“Officer” in the 2012-2017 Agreement.

The 2007-2012 Agreement, as was the case with previous Agreements between the
parties, contained different approaches to the term “Officer”: sometimes the word was
capitalized, sometimes it was not. Sometimes it was part of a hybrid expression, such as “police
officer”. There was no discernible pattern to these usages. Lodge representatives on the Contract
Drafting Committee expressed the view that, in order to convey the appropriate level of respect
for the men and women serving in the Chicago Police Department, the term should be uniformly
capitalized. The City wholeheartedly concurs with the desire to evidence the proper respect.
Accordingly, the parties have agreed that the term should be uniformly capitalized. In so doing,
the Lodge and the City acknowledge that they intend no substantive change of any kind or
degree in the rights, privileges, obligations or benefits of any sworn Police Officer, regardless of
whether the individual is a member of the Lodge’s bargaining unit or is a probationary Police
Officer, ete. Neither party will assert, in any grievance, arbitration, administrative agency or
court proceeding, that the fact that the term “Officer” is now capitalized when it previously was
not has any bearing on the appropriate interpretation of any provision in the Agreement.

155
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

September 3, 2014
Page 2

If the above accurately reflects our agreement, please so indicate by signing your name
below.

Very truly yours,

je 0 rengeh p,

James C. Franczek, Jr.
AGREED:

sch: frend
Burns, for the FOP, Chicago Lodge No. 7

cc: Joseph P. Martinico
Donald J. O'Neill

156
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

300 SOUTH WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 4400 | CHICAGO, tl. 60506
‘Te 312.986.0300 | F; 312.986.9592 | WWW.FRANCZEK.COM

JAMES C FRANCZEK, JR.

312.786.6110
‘ September 3, 2014 xe oie
Jacobs, Burns, Orlove & Hernandez
150 North Michigan Avenue
Suite 1000
Chicago, IL 60601

Re: Section 29A.4
Dear Mr. Burns:
This letter sets forth the parties’ agreement with respect to Section 29A.4.

Effective calendar year 2012, the Chicago Police Operations Calendar was revised to
provide that the first day of each Police Period will begin on a Sunday. Prior to and in
anticipation of this revision, the Department and the Lodge reached certain understandings and
agreements regarding furloughs and furlough extensions under the new Calendar and in the
context of different work schedules, as set forth in their letter of agreement dated September 2,
2011, It is the parties’ intent that those understandings and agreements shall continue to apply
during the term of this collective bargaining agreement, and the parties’ decision not to revise the
language appearing in Section 29A.4 regarding furloughs and furlough extensions is not intended
to and shall not be interpreted as an agreement to modify the understandings and agreements
referenced in this paragraph.

If the above accurately reflects our agreement, please so indicate by signing your name
below.
Very truly yours,

ae 0 rewgeh jo,

James C. Franczek, Jr,
AGREED:

A vt Burns, for the FOP, Chicago Lodge No. 7

cc; Joseph P. Martinico
Donald J. O'Neill

157
FRANCZEKRADELET

ATTORNEYS & COUNSELORS

 

300 SOUTH WACKEW DRIVE, SUFTE 3400 | CHICAGO, 11. 60606
‘7h 312.986.0300 1 Fi 312.986.9192 | WOWFRANCZEX.COM

JAMES C. FRANCZEK, JR.
312.786.6110
September 3, 2014 ta
Dean Angelo, Sr. wus
President
Fraternal Order of Police,
Chicago Lodge No. 7
1412 West Washington Blvd.
Chicago, IL 60607

Re: Wellness Benefit
Dear President Angelo:

1 am writing to confirm that the reference in Arbitrator Benn’s February 28, 2005 award
to “$600.00 per year (effective 1/1/06)” for the City’s wellness benefit is to be interpreted as
commitment by the City to fund up to $600.00 of eligible wellness benefits for each officer
enrolled in the City’s PPO plans and each covered member of the officer's family who is also
enrolled in the City’s PPO plans.

The parties agree that, effective January 1, 2015, this $600.00 per year wellness benefit
is eliminated and replaced in accordance with the Preventive Care Benefit provided for in
Paragraph (1)(A) of the parties’ Memorandum of Understanding Re: Health Care Plan. The
parties further agree that, if during the term of this Agreement the Preventive Care Benefit
provided for in Paragraph (1)(A) of the parties’ Memorandum of Understanding Re: Health Care
Plan is reduced or eliminated by an amendment to federal law or by @ court ruling, upon the
request of either party, the parties shall meet promptly and negotiate with respect to substitute
terms intended to provide benefits substantially similar to those available under the Preventive
Care Benefit or, if such result is not possible, the pre-existing $600.00 per year wellness benefit.
In the event the parties are unable to agree upon substitute terms, the dispute shall be submitted
to the impasse resolution procedure set forth in Section 28,3(B).

Your acknowledgement and agreement is appreciated in the space provided below.
Very truly yours,

é. pramgeh p,

James C. Franczek, Jr.

Lead Ee, 2
ngelo, Sr.

158

158
