5.)

RESOLUTION

BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EL PASO:
That the City Manager be authorized to sign the Articles of Agreement between the City

of El Paso and the El Paso Municipal Officers’ Association for the contract period covering

November 11, 2014 through August 31, 2018.

Dated this 11" day of November 2014.

CITY OF EL PASO

Oscar Leesef,
ATTEST:

Me

Richarda Duffy Momsen
City Clerk

APPROVED AS TO FORM:

 

ssistant City Attorney

SE :6 WY 9- AON bioz
“Ld30 WY3T9 ALIO

 
 

» O) PN CKEsscal

 

alse 1003
1301926-2176/345642
wy

ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT
Between
CITY OF EL PASO, TEXAS
and

EL PASO MUNICIPAL
POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

November 11, 2014 —August 31, 2018

 
TABLE OF CONTENT

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ARTICLE CLAUSE PAGE
= Preamble
1 Recognition 4
2 City 's Retained Prerogatives 4
3 No Strike, No Lockout 6
4 Wages 7
5 Hours of Work 9
6 Incentive Pay 12
7 Pensions 14
8 Insurance 14
9 Uniforms and Equipment 18
10 Vacations 20
11 Holidays 21
12 Funeral and Parental Leave 22
13 Civil Leave 23
14 Legal Defense for Police 23
Officers
15 Sick Leave 25
16 Job Related Disabilities 33
17 Leave for Association 34
Business
18 Safety and Health 36
19 Promotional Examinations 37
20 Reinstatement After 40
Resignation
21 Grievance Procedure 41
22 Bulletin Board 46
23 Nondiscrimination 46
24 Existing Conditions 49
25 Miscellaneous Provisions 50
26 Working Off Suspended 52
Time

27 Personnel Records 52
28 Assignments 53
29 Separability 54
30 Internal Affairs Investigations! 54
31 Stress Management 59
32 Drug and Alcohol Testing _ 61
33 Complete Agreement 64
34 Duration 65

 

428397

 

ny C1003

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

35 Outside Employment 65
“A” Wage Formula & Wage 67
Tables
“B” Police Class Titles 71
“c" Impasse Procedure 72
“Dp” Request for Lateral Transfer 74
Form
“Ee” Personnel Files-Section 75
143.089, LGC
“FY Drug and Alcohol Policy 77
‘G" Transfer Policy 78
“H” January 25, 2002 Wage 82
Formula Document
“I” Garrity Warning Form 83
‘y” Physical Fitness 84
“K" Schedule of Benefits 85
“LY Qutside Employment Policy 86

 

428397

 

 
ARTICLE OF AGREEMENT
Between
CITY OF EL PASO, TEXAS
and
EL PASO MUNICIPAL POLICE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION

PREAMBLE

THIS AGREEMENT, entered into this ____ day of 20__ is
between the CITY OF EL PASO, TEXAS, hereinafter called the “City”, and the EL
PASO MUNICIPAL POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION, hereinafter called the
“Association.”

 

The purpose of this Agreement is to promote harmonious relations
between the City and the employees covered hereby and to fix the rates of pay,
hours of work, and the terms and conditions of employment for these
employees.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Section 1. The City has recognized the Association as the exclusive
bargaining agent for a unit consisting of all sworn certified full-time paid
employees who regularly serve in a professional law enforcement capacity within
the City's Police Department, except the Police Chief. Bargaining Unit employees
will be referred to in this Agreement as "Officers" or "employee."

Section 2. The parties hereto recognize that there are pending or
potential state or federal legislative proposals which would exclude some or all
supervisors from an appropriate collective bargaining unit. The parties agree
that, as of the effective date of any such applicable provisions, any employees
within the bargaining unit whose duties bring them within the definition of
supervisor contained therein shall be excluded from the bargaining unit. If the
parties are unable to agree as to whether certain employees are supervisors
within the meaning of that legislation, they will cooperate to submit the question
to the appropriate court or agency for prompt resolution of the matter.

ARTICLE 2
CITY'S RETAINED PREROGATIVES

Section 1. Except to the extent expressly abridged by Chapter 174,
Local Government Code, or by a specific provision of this Agreement, the City

 

428397 4
reserves and retains, solely and exclusively, all of its inherent and/or statutory
rights to operate the City government, as such rights existed prior to the
enactment of Chapter 174, Local Government Code.

Section 2. Except to the extent expressly abridged by a specific
provision of this Agreement, the direction of the City's working forces, both
within and without the bargaining unit, including, by way of illustration only and
not of enumeration, the right to plan, direct, expand, control, initiate, reduce,
transfer or terminate specific operations, duties or functions, to hire, assign,
transfer and promote employees or refrain from any of the foregoing, to
discharge, suspend, demote, reprimand or otherwise discipline employees
pursuant to the City Charter of 1984 as amended February 7, 2004 and the Civil
Service Rules in effect upon execution of this agreement, to introduce any new
or improved methods or facilities, to subcontract, and to make such rules and
regulations as may be necessary or desirable for the operation of the City,
continue to be vested exclusively in the City.

Section 3. All promotions to positions in P 7 and above shall be exempt
from competitive examinations and shall be made instead by appointment by the
Police Chief. Only persons then employed by the City's Police Department shall
be eligible for such appointment. Employees working in P 7 and above shall
serve at the pleasure of the Police Chief and may be demoted from said position
at the Chief's discretion. If any such employee is demoted by the Chief, the
Officer shall normally be returned to the class grade from which the Officer was
appointed and the Officer's salary shall be in accordance with said competitive
classification with service time credited as continuous time in that competitive
classification and with all salary increases to which the Officer would have been
automatically entitled had he continuously remained in said competitive
classification. If the Police Chief demotes an Officer to a class grade lower than
that from which the Officer was appointed, the Officer retains all rights to appeal
said demotion to the Civil Service Commission and the Commission may,
pursuant to the Charter and its Rules and Regulations, restore the employee to
the class grade from which the employee was appointed, but no higher; except
as provided in this sentence, the Commission shall have no jurisdiction, power or
authority to investigate or review or to alter the terms of any demotion made
pursuant to this Section. For the duration of this Agreement, no more than six
positions (exclusive of the Police Chief) shall be subject to the terms of this
Section.

Section 4. An Officer shall be deemed to be a probationary employee
for the first twelve months after the Officer has successfully completed the Basic
Training Academy work. The Chief may extend the ending date of the

 

428397 ‘ 5
probationary employee's probationary period: (1) to ensure that the probationary
employee serves a full twelve months as a police officer in full duty status; or (2)
if necessary to determine if retention of the probationary employee is in the best
interest of the Department; or (3) if an investigation is pending into the
probationary employee’s conduct at the time the probation would otherwise end.
In the case of (2) and (3) herein, the probationary period can be extended for no
longer than 180 days. The Chief shall notify the Association in writing of the
reason for extending the probationary period of an Officer. A probationary Officer
may be discharged at any time at the discretion of the Chief, without appeal to
the Commission. However, before so doing, the Chief will meet with the
probationary Officer, provide reasons for proposed discharge, and give the
Officer an opportunity to provide reasons why the discharge is not warranted.
Upon request, the probationary Officer is entitled to Association representation at
the pre-discharge meeting.

Section 5. In the event that an Officer is serving a probationary period
in a position and is promoted to a higher position, the probationary period at the
lower position shall be deemed to have been completed.

Section 6. The Association recognizes the City's right to assign or
reassign Officers for any reason which will promote the good of the service and
efficiency of the department. The City in turn recognizes that the administrative
assignment or reassignment shall not be utilized for the sole reason of
disciplining an Officers.

ARTICLE 3
NO STRIKE, NO LOCK-OUT

Section 1 The City agrees that it will not lock out the Officers covered
by this Agreement.

Section 2. The Association agrees that neither it nor any of the
Officers covered by this Agreement will permit, sanction, call, acquiesce or
engage in any strike; sit-down; slow-down; speed-up; sick-out; sympathy strike;
picketing for the purpose of inducing, influencing or coercing a change in the
conditions or compensation or the rights, privileges or obligations of
employment; or any other work stoppage or interference with the operation of
the City for any reason.

Section 3. It is expressly understood and agreed that the refusal or
concerted failure by any Officer and Officers covered by this Agreement to cross
or work behind the picket line of any association, union or other organization

 

428397 6
shall constitute a violation of this Agreement. It is likewise understood and
agreed that the refusal or failure of any Officers covered by this Agreement
faithfully and impartially to enforce the laws of the State of Texas and the
ordinances of the City of El Paso at the site of or in connection with any labor
dispute shall constitute a violation of this Agreement.

Section 4. | Any Officer covered by this Agreement who participates in
any action prohibited by this Article may be discharged, suspended, demoted
and/or otherwise disciplined, at the option of the City. This Section shall be
cumulative of any other rights the City may have by statute, at common-law or
in equity against the Association and/or the employees covered by this
Agreement.

Section 5. | Should the City find it necessary to furlough Officers during
the term of this Agreement, it shall provide the Association 30-days advance
notice and an opportunity to negotiate concerning procedures and effects of
such furlough.

ARTICLE 4
WAGES

Section 1. Class titles and grades for Officers are set forth in Appendix
“B” to this Agreement. The base salaries for Officers covered by this Agreement
shall be set as follows:

(a) Effective September 1, 2014, all Officers will receive wages as
reflected in Appendix A-1 [June 1, 2014 Wage Scale]. Effective November
16, 2014, all Officers will receive a 1.25% wage increase, and will be paid in
accordance with the wage table set forth in Appendix “A-2”. After November
16, 2014, Officers will receive annual cost-of-living raises each September 1.
The amount of the cost-of-living raises will be determined in accordance
with the formula attached to this Agreement as Appendix “A”. Commencing
September 1, 2015, Officers will be paid in accordance with the wage table
set forth in Appendix A-3, which includes additional steps in the various
ranks. [City’s proposed wage table, which will be changed to reflect 9/1/15
COLA].

(b) | Thereafter and upon their anniversary dates and upon successful
completion of probation, all officers below the rank of deputy chief shall
advance to the next higher level in their Class Grade. The Officer will
become eligible for the step increase at their next anniversary date.

 

428397 oS 7
(c) Any Officer of the rank of deputy chief or above who shall be a part
of the bargaining unit as defined in Article 1 of this Agreement and who has
not advanced in level pursuant to the procedures in City Ordinance 8064,
shall nevertheless always receive the same percentage increase, if any,
negotiated as a cost of living increase in the levels for his Class Grade;

(d) Officers who are promoted to sergeant and above will be given the
entry pay for the rank to which they are promoted or the next higher level
which will assure an increase of at least 5% in pay; provided that, if
rounding an Officer’s hourly rate to the nearest full cent per hour results in
an increase that is slightly less than 5%, such rounding shall constitute
compliance with this paragraph;

(e) — Effective September 1, 2015, placement to a detective position shall
result in one advancement in level and reset the employee’s anniversary
date;

(f) Any placement of Officers, excluding probationary officers
transferred, from detective to police officer will be with cause, and that Officer
has the right of appeal as under any other disciplinary action;

(g) | Placement to a detective position will be based on Examination
pursuant to Civil Service Rules;

(h) Promotion to sergeant will be pursuant to Examination under Civil
Service Rules; and

(i) Promotions within the lieutenant and commander Class Grades will
be pursuant to the Civil Service Rules.

Section 2. Officers who are assigned to duty and actually work between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall receive premium pay of 4%. If the
shifts are overlapping Officers will only receive premium pay for the hours actually
worked between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Effective January 2018, Officers who are
assigned to duty and actually work between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
shall receive premium pay of 5%. If the shifts are overlapping Officers will only
receive premium pay for the hours actually worked between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.

Section 3. Field Training Officers, who shall be appointed by or approved
by the Chief, shall receive an additional 4% of their salary added to their regular
class grade and level pay during the period they serve. Upon completion of their

 

428397 8
duties, they shall revert to their regular grade and level pay. Effective January
2017, Field Training Officers who shall be appointed by or approved by the Chief
shall receive an additional 5% of their salary added to their regular class grade and
level pay during the period they serve.

Section 4. | An Officer who is required to perform the duties of a higher
class title is entitled to be paid the salary prescribed for lowest level of that class
title that results in a pay raise during the time the Officer performs those duties.

Any Officer whose employment is terminated by death, resignation, or
retirement while acting in a temporary appointment shall nevertheless be paid the
Officer's accumulated sick leave and vacation at the permanent rate.

Section 5. — The City shall itemize Officers’ paychecks to reflect payment of
wages, overtime, incentive pay, compensatory time, clothing allowance and
longevity.

Section 6. Motorcycle hazard pay shall be $100.00 bi-weekly. If an
officer is placed in a work status that does not require the officer to operate a
motorcycle due to either: (1) the officer sustaining an off duty injury or illness
that does not permit the officer to operate a motorcycle for a period greater than
30 days; or (2) the officer seeks and obtains a temporary reassignment to a
position not involving the performance of the operation of a motorcycle; then
motorcycle hazard pay will cease until and unless the officer is returned to a
status which requires the operation of a motorcycle.

ARTICLE 5
HOURS OF WORK

Section 1. Officers are normally scheduled to work 40 hours per week
in five eight-hour days, but nothing in this Agreement shall constitute a
guaranteed minimum or maximum number of hours of work in any day or week.
A meal break and rest breaks may be taken during the eight-hour shift schedule
in compliance with the Rules and Regulations of the Department.

Departmental units which are currently on a four-10 hour day shift are
expected to remain on a four-10 hour day shift. The Chief may implement the
four-10 hour day shift at other departmental units at his discretion. The Chief will
provide 30-days notice to the departmental unit prior to changing a departmental
unit to or from a four-10 hour day shift. Officers assigned to the five-8 hour or
four-10 hour day shift shall have consecutive days off. For purposes of this
provision, days off on Saturday-Sunday are considered consecutive days off.

 

428397 9
However, at the request of the Officer, subject to the discretion and approval of
the Department, the Officer may be granted split days off. A meal break and rest
breaks may be taken during the ten-hour shift in compliance with the Rules and
Regulations of the department.

Section 2. _ All hours paid for in excess of 40 hours in a work week shall
be paid at the rate of time and one-half of the Officer's "rate" of pay as that term
is defined in the FLSA, except as provided herein and in Article 11. A telephone
contact or discussion or an email communication shall be compensable in fifteen-
minute increments; however, the first fifteen minutes of such contacts shall be
non-compensable unless such contacts in the aggregate exceed fifteen minutes.

In no event shall an officer be paid in excess of two-and-one-half times the
employee's regular straight-time. "Sick leave (SLP &SLD)" shall be counted as
non-productive time for the purposes of accruing overtime.

Section 3. Officers shall have the option of requesting compensatory
time in lieu of overtime. Officers may accrue a maximum of 180-hours of
compensatory time. The Officers shall be allowed to use the accrued
compensatory time under the same policies that exist for the use of vacation
days. Officers may request compensatory time off in increments of one (1) hour
or more, Every reasonable effort shall be made to allow officers to take their
compensatory time.

Section 4. The City shall not alter an Officer's regular schedule for the
purpose of avoiding or reducing the payment of overtime except in the case City
approved travel or training. If an Officer is scheduled to work on a holiday but
the department determines that the Officer is non-essential, then providing the
Officer with the holiday off is not a violation of this provision. The City shall not
make a determination regarding the status of an Officer as being essential or
non-essential for the purpose of avoiding or reducing the payment of overtime or
compensatory time in accordance with this Section and Article 11.

For purposes of this Article, "essential" personnel normally include Officers in
Patrol, CSU, Fusion-Real Time Crime Watch Center, Records, and
Communications. However, the Police Chief retains discretion to release or call
additional personnel to work due to operational needs or situations involving
critical incidents. In so doing, the Chief will provide Officers with the maximum
advance notice consistent with meeting operational needs.

Section 5. ‘If an Officer is called back to duty or subpoenaed to give
testimony in court about events arising out of City employment, while the

 

428397 , 10
employee is on vacation or on a holiday, the Officer shall be paid for the vacation
or holiday hours and shall also be paid for the hours actually worked or which
the employee spends in court until the employee is released. In any such case,
the Officer shall be deemed to have worked a minimum of three hours if the
Department calls back the Officer to duty. If an Officer on sick leave or funeral
leave is called back to work or subpoenaed under similar circumstances, the
Officer shall be deemed to be at work (with a minimum of three hours work) and
the time so spent shall not be charged to the Officer's accumulated sick leave.

Section 6. If an Officer is called back to duty or subpoenaed to give
testimony in court, whether in criminal or civil actions, about events arising out
of City employment, when the Officer would otherwise be off duty, the Officer
shall be deemed to have worked a minimum of three hours; even if call back is
canceled. The call-back time provided for in this and the preceding Section shall
be inapplicable where the additional working time is immediately prior to or
following any other time worked by that employee.

Section 7. The provisions of Sections 5 and 6 of this Article regarding
payment for time which an employee spends in court shall be inapplicable where
the employee is a party to the proceeding, except proceedings arising out of City
employment, or where the employee is to be compensated for such time by any
other person, as where the employee is being subpoenaed to testify as an expert
witness.

Section 8. Officers subpoenaed by a charged officer to testify before an
arbitrator or a hearing examiner about operative facts and job ability shall be
paid at the Court time rate set forth in Section 4. Two Officers only subpoenaed
by a charged officer to testify before an arbitrator or a hearing examiner about
the officer's character shall be paid at the court time rate. If the hearing is when
the charged officer is not regularly scheduled to work, the time shall be unpaid.
If the hearing is scheduled to be held when the officer is on-duty, the City has
the option of paying the officer or re-scheduling the hearing to a date the officer
is on their regularly scheduled days off.

Section 9. The City shall provide each Officer with a minimum of 32
hours paid in-service training and 8 hours of firearms training during the contract
year. The Chief retains the right to assign any Officer to any in-service training
program. If an Officer is scheduled to attend in-service or firearms training
during the contract, attendance is mandatory.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, the
following may apply when the department contracts with a person or firm
outside of the El Paso Police Department to provide in-service training: When an

 

428397” nN
employee (including an employee who is normally scheduled to work eight
hours, with a one-half hour paid lunch period) is assigned to spend eight hours
of in-service training, he shall be given and shall take a one-hour unpaid lunch
break.

Section 10. The City reserves the right to place Officers on standby
status at their residence at the overtime rate. In such a case, the Officer shall be
deemed to be working for only the actual hours that he is on stand-by. At the
discretion of the authorized individual who places the Officer on stand-by status,
the employee may be instructed to remain at his residence during the time he is
being paid to stand by. If the authorized individual who places the Officer on
stand-by status gives the employee permission to leave his residence while on
stand-by, the authorized individual may condition such permission on the
Officer's taking with him any appropriate uniform and/or dress clothes while he
leaves home.

Section 11. Where scheduling and manpower contingencies permit, the
City will arrange an Officer's work schedule so as to permit the employee to
attend college.

Section 12. For the purposes of this Article, assistant chiefs, deputy chiefs
for overtime under this Agreement.

ARTICLE 6
INCENTIVE PAY

Section 1. The City shall pay each Officer holding an Advanced
Certificate granted by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers
Standards and Education the sum of $105.00 per month. The City shall pay each
employee holding an Intermediate Certificate granted by the Texas Commission
on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education the sum of $55.00 per
month.

Section 2. This section shall apply to the highest degree held by the
Officer. As used in this Section, the phrase "accredited college or university” shall
have the same meaning as defined in Section 211.1 of the regulations of the
Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education.

The City shall pay each Officer holding an Associate’s degree granted by an
accredited college or university the sum of $20.00 per month. The City shall pay
each Officer holding a Bachelor’s degree granted by an accredited college or
university the sum of $100.00 per month. The City shall pay each Officer holding

 

428397 12
a Master’s degree granted by an accredited college or university the sum of
$125.00 per month.

Commencing January 3, 2010, the City shall pay each employee holding an
Associate’s degree granted by an accredited college or university the sum of
$20.00 per month. The City shall pay each employee holding a Bachelor's degree
granted by an accredited college or university the sum of $125.00 per month.
The City shall pay each employee holding a Master's degree granted by an
accredited college or university the sum of $150.00 per month.

This section shall apply to the highest degree held by the employee. As used in
this Section, the phrase “accredited college or university” shall have the same
meaning as defined in section 211.1 of the regulations of the Texas Commission
on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education.

Commencing January 11, 2015, the City shall pay each Officer holding an
Associate's degree granted by an accredited college or university the sum of
$45.00 per month. The City shall pay each Officer holding a Bachelor's degree
granted by an accredited college or university the sum of $150.00 per month.
The City shall pay each Officer holding a Master’s degree granted by an
accredited college or university the sum of $175.00 per month.

In order to receive pay under this section, the degree must be in law
enforcement related studies. The Chief retains the discretion to determine if the
degree is related to law enforcement. Law enforcement degrees include but are
not limited to Criminal Justice, Public Administration, Homeland Security, Political
Science, Psychology, Sociology, Intelligence, Criminalistics and Business
Administration. Upon request made prior to commencement of a course of study,
the Chief will provide advance notice to an Officer concerning whether a chosen
degree qualifies for payment under this section.

Officers who have already earned or commenced an Associates’, Bachelors’ or
Masters' degree at the signing of the Agreement shall be grandfathered and will
receive the corresponding incentive pay related to their level of education.

Section 3. To ensure records are accurate and incentive pay is timely
issued, officers are responsible for reporting and providing proper documentation
to the El Paso Police Department Training Director or his designee to show that
the officer has completed training and education received outside the
Department. Officers are not entitled to retroactive incentive pay. Incentive pay
shall begin on the date that the officer has reported and provided the proper

 

sath hp €1003

428397 13
documentation to the El Paso Police Department Training Director or his
designee.

Section 4. Pension contributions will be made on any cash payments
under this Article.

ARTICLE 7
PENSIONS

For the duration of this Agreement, the City shall contribute to the
Firemen and Policemen Pension Fund a sum equal to triple the employee's own
contribution to such Fund; provided that, in no case shall the City's contribution
exceed 18.5% of an employee's salary, longevity, premium pay, incentive pay,
and overtime pay, unless a higher amount is set in accordance with Article 6243b
of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes.

ARTICLE 8
INSURANCE AND BENEFITS

Section 1. For the duration of this Agreement, the City shall provide term life
and accidental death and dismemberment insurance policies of $50,000.00 for
Officers, and term life insurance policies of $2,000.00 for the Officers’ spouses
and $1,000.00 for the Officers’ dependent children as defined by the Group Life
Insurance Policy Booklet.

Section 2. All Officers who wish to participate in the City of El Paso Health
Insurance Benefit Program may elect to be covered by the High Deductible Plan
(Consumer Driven Health Plan), the Basic/Core Plan, or the Buy Up Plan, as
specified in this Section. An Officer's participation in a Plan is subject to the
following conditions:

(a) Plans & Contribution Rates.

(i) Contributions for September 1, 2014 to November 30, 2014.
An Officer may choose to be covered by either the Basic/Core Plan or the Buy Up
Plan. The Officer must contribute to the selected Plan at the rate of contribution
specified in this Subsection. Those rates are:

Basic/Core Plan

Employee Only $ 23.74 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $ 55.57 two pay periods per month
Employee + 2 or more $ 87.98 two pay periods per month

 

428397 ‘ 14
Buy Up Plan

Employee Only
Employee + 1
Employee + 2 or more

(ii) Contributions for December 1, 2014 to November 30, 2015.

$ 46.31 two pay periods per month
$ 98.40 two pay periods per month

$121.55 two pay periods per month

An Officer may choose to be covered by the High Deductible Plan (Consumer
Driven Health Plan), the Basic/Core Plan, or the Buy Up Plan. The Officer must
contribute to the selected Plan at the rate of contribution specified in this

Subsection. Those rates are:

Consumer Driven Health Plan
Employee Only

Employee + 1

Employee + 2 or more

Basic/Core Plan
Employee Only
Employee + 1
Employee + 2 or more

Buy Up Plan
Employee Only
Employee + 1
Employee + 2 or more

(iii) Contributions for December 1, 2015 to November 30, 2016.

$ 28.25 two pay periods per month
$ 66.00 two pay periods per month
$103.75 two pay periods per month

$ 44.40 two pay periods per month
$ 98.32 two pay periods per month
$152.26 two pay periods per month

$ 90.30 two pay periods per month
$190.24 two pay periods per month
$290.15 two pay periods per month

An Officer may choose to be covered by the High Deductible Plan (Consumer
Driven Health Plan), the Basic/Core Plan, or the Buy Up Plan. The Officer must
contribute to the selected Plan at the rate of contribution specified in this

Subsection. Those rates are:

Consumer Driven Health Plan
Employee Only

Employee + 1

Employee + 2 or more

Basic/Core Plan
Employee Only

 

428397

$ 34.88 two pay periods per month
$ 81.49 two pay periods per month
$128.09 two pay periods per month

$ 54.81 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $121.39 two pay periods per month

Employee + 2 or more $187.98 two pay periods per month
Bu Pl

Employee Only $111.50 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $234.87 two pay periods per month
Employee + 2 or more $358.22 two pay periods per month

(iv) Contributions for December 1, 2016 to November 30, 2017.
An Officer may choose to be covered by the High Deductible Plan (Consumer
Driven Health Plan), the Basic/Core Plan, or the Buy Up Plan. The Officer must
contribute to the selected Plan at the rate of contribution specified in this
Subsection. Those rates are:

Consumer Driven Health Plan

Employee Only $ 37.32 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $ 87.20 two pay periods per month
Employee + 2 or more $137.05 two pay periods per month
Basic/Core Plan

Employee Only $ 58.65 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $129.89 two pay periods per month
Employee + 2 or more $201.14 two pay periods per month
Buy Up Plan

Employee Only $139.19 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $293.20 two pay periods per month
Employee + 2 or more $447.18 two pay periods per month

(v) December 1, 2017 to November 30, 2018.
An Officer may choose to be covered by the High Deductible Plan (Consumer
Driven Health Plan), the Basic/Core Plan, or the Buy Up Plan. The Officer must
contribute to the selected Plan at the rate of contribution specified in this
Subsection. Those rates are:

Consumer Driven Health Plan

Employee Only $ 39.93 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $ 93.30 two pay periods per month
Employee + 2 or more $146.64 two pay periods per month
Basic, Plan

Employee Only $ 62.75 two pay periods per month

 

428397 " 16
Employee + 1 $138.98 two pay periods per month

Employee + 2 or more $215.21 two pay periods per month
Buy Up Plan

Employee Only $170.20 two pay periods per month
Employee + 1 $358.54 two pay periods per month
Employee + 2 or more $546.83 two pay periods per month

(vi) In no event will Officers contribute a higher premium than that
specified for the City's non-Uniform employees. If the rates specified in Subsections
(a)(i) — (v) are higher than those paid by non-Uniform employees in the same plan
year, the rates specified will be lowered to the rates paid by non-Uniform
employees.

(b) Program & Coverage Requirements. An Officer's participation in
a Plan is subject to all program and coverage requirements, policies and conditions
established by the City for such Plan. The requirements, policies and conditions
shall not be amended during the term of this Agreement without the parties’
mutual consent except for any changes mandated by federal and/or state law.

(c) Health Benefits. The benefits provided to Officers and their family
members under the three Plans effective January 1, 2015 are those provided to
non-Uniform employees as of on September 1, 2014. Those benefits are reflected
in the Schedule of Benefits attached to this Agreement as Appendix K. The benefits
provided will not be changed during the term of this Agreement absent the parties’
mutual consent.

(d) Dental & Optical Benefits. During the term of this Agreement, the
City will provide Officers and their family members a dental and optical benefit
program equivalent to that in effect on September 1, 2014. Any contributions
currently in effect for those programs shall remain the same.

(e) Cafeteria and Health Savings Account Plans. In addition,
Officers covered by this Agreement will be considered eligible to participate in the
City’s Section 125 Cafeteria Plan and the City’s Health Savings Account Plan. The
City agrees to allow the CLEAT Benefit Plan and Trust (dental and vision plan) to be
offered in the City’s Section 125 Cafeteria Plan.

(f) No Pension Contributions. No pension contributions will be made
on any cash payments under this Section.

 

428397 7" 17
Section 3. The City agrees to meet with the Association periodically during the
term of this Agreement regarding Health Benefits.

Section 4. The City shall employ a person with insurance expertise who will,
among the person's other duties, assist employees who, having filed their claim,
have complaints or conflicts with the insurance carriers or benefit administrator.

Section 5. The City, at no premium cost to it, will cooperate with the
Association in providing optional Term Life Insurance upon the life of Officers
under terms specified in the City’s Group Life Insurance Policy booklet.

Section 6. In advance of the first enrollment period occurring after the
effective date of this Agreement, the City will provide trained personnel to
conduct training seminars to Officers on all health plans available to Officers.

Section 7. The City will allow payroll deductions to Officers for Supplemental
Insurance premiums for up to two providers designated by the Association,
provided that the designated providers comply with City vendor policies and
procedures and do not require additional information added to the City’s HRIS
system. The City will not charge an administrative fee to the Officers or
Association for making the deductions for the designated providers.

ARTICLE 9
UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT

Section 1. Each employee shall be responsible for providing their own
hand gun and footwear.

Section 2. The City shall furnish a winter jacket, required accessories
and uniforms, consisting of six summer shirts, four winter shirts and four pairs of
pants.

The City shall also furnish an appropriate impact weapon that is approved
by the Department and that the employee is certified to use.

The City shail furnish vests to each Officer who requests one.

The City shall also properly equip the appropriate Departmental units, as
selected by the Chief, with shotguns and required related accessories.

Section 3. The City shall replace each uniformed Officer's winter
jacket, required accessories and uniforms as they wear out due to normal wear

  

pe-c1003

428397 18
and tear or where they are irreparably damaged in the line of duty through no
negligence of the employee. Each Officer shall be responsible for replacing at the
employee's cost any of the foregoing which the loses or irreparably damages
through carelessness. The City shall initially determine whether any piece of
clothing or equipment referred to in this Section is worn out and should be
replaced, subject to the grievance procedure contained in Article 21.

Section 4. The City shall pay a $475.00 year clothing allowance to all
employees in the Detective rank and officers regardless of rank who are routinely
required to wear business attire as a part of their assignment, to be paid
biannually. No pension contributions will be made on any cash payment s under
this Section.

Section5. The City shall furnish to each employee a copy of the
following:

(a) The Police Department Rules and Regulations and General Orders;

(b) A booklet describing benefits of employment available to City
employees;

(c) This collective bargaining Agreement and any contract
amendments or modifications during the term of this Contract;

(d) | The Texas Code of Criminal Procedure

(e) The Texas Penal Code;

(f) | The Texas Motor Vehicle Laws;

(g) The Texas Family Code;

(h) | The Texas Controlled Substances Act; and

(i) A current copy of the Civil Service Rules and Regulations.

The documents listed above will be made available on an intra-department
website and provided in paper form upon written request to the Office of the
Chief of Police.

Section 6. The City shall supply 18 rounds of ammunition to those
officers carrying revolvers and sufficient rounds of ammunition to fill 3 magazines
for those officers carrying semi-automatic weapons.

 

428397 , 19
ARTICLE 10
VACATIONS

Section 1. An employee shall accrue vacations in accordance with the
following schedule:

Vacation Hours/ Vacation Hours/
Years of Service Monthly Accrual Annual Accrual
1-10 10 120
10-15 12 144
15-20 14 168
Over 20 16 192

Section 2. Officers shall be permitted to accumulate up to 440 hours of
vacation time. Officers who exceed the maximum accumulation of vacation time
will be given up to twelve (12) months to utilize the hours in excess of 440
hours. Officers shall not lose any accrued vacation if they are in the process of
taking their vacation time during their anniversary date. Vacation Leave may be
granted to Officers for personal matters in increments of one hour, subject to the
approval of the Department Head. Such requests must be made at least 24
hours in advance.

Section 3. An Officer who has accrued vacation time to the Officer's
credit at the time of the termination of the Officer's employment shall either:

(a) Be permitted to take the Officer's accrued vacation; or

(b) Be paid in a lump sum payment or in quarterly installments up to
one year the salary equivalent of the accrued vacation. Effective
upon execution of this Agreement, the term salary equivalent as
used in this paragraph shall be defined as including longevity and
incentive pay.

Section 4. The El Paso Municipal Police Officers' Association, in
consideration of the City of El Paso granting additional days vacation agrees to
defend, to indemnify and to hold the City of El Paso harmless from any and all
claims brought or actions filed against the City of El Paso under those portions of
Texas Local Government Code Sections 142.0014 & 142.0015 that deal with
vacations, whether such claims or actions be rightfully or wrongfully brought or
filed, and against all cost incurred by the City of El Paso.

 

428397 , 20
Section 5. Effective on or before July 1, 2015, and each July 1*
thereafter, the City may post a notice as to whether the City intends to purchase
accrued vacation leave from Officers, and if so, the maximum number of accrued
vacation hours the City intends to purchase from individual officers or the police
department as a whole. If the total hours tendered to the City from all Officers
exceed the amount the City desires to buy back, it may allocate each Officer’s
sell back amount on a pro rata basis. Subject to the foregoing sentence, each
Officer may elect to sell back to the City accrued vacation leave not to exceed 80
hours per fiscal year; provided that, an Officer who elected to sell back any such
hours must retain, after such sell back, not less than 80 additional hours of
accrued vacation leave. Selling vacation leave hours to the City under this
provision shall be in lieu of any other option to use vacation days under this
Agreement or any other City policy or practice. The City shall distribute funds
under this provision in cash directly to the officer.

Section 6. The current practice concerning selection of vacation days will
be continued during the life of the Agreement. Officer's request for vacation days
will not be denied unless necessitated by the legitimate operational needs of the
Department.

ARTICLE 11
HOLIDAYS

Section 1. The following days shall be paid vacation holidays:

 

 

 

 

 

 

New Year’s Day_ Thanksgiving

Martin Luther King Day Friday after Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day {Christmas Day

[Independence Day Employee's Birthday

[Labor Day

 

 

 

Section 2. Non-Shift Officers. Officers who are regularly scheduled to work
Monday through Friday will receive paid time off for holidays.

Paid holidays may be changed at the City Manager's discretion and based on the
needs of the City. Written notice will be provided to the Association thirty (30)
days prior to any revisions to the paid holiday schedule. However, the City will
not reduce the total number of holidays during the term of this Agreement.

When any holiday listed above falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday may be
considered the holiday. When any holiday listed above falls on a Sunday, the
following Monday may be considered the holiday.

 

428397 m vane 21
Section 3. Four-10 Hour Shift Officers. In conjunction with the four-10
hour day program as set forth in Article 5 (Section 1) of this Agreement, the ten
(10) hour shift Officers will be compensated for holidays as follows:

Officers not working the holiday, when the holiday is normally a scheduled work
day, will receive ten (10) hours pay so as not to go below a forty (40) hour work
schedule for the week.

Officers who actually work the holiday will receive it at the overtime rate in
addition to their forty-hour schedule for the week.

Officers not working the holiday, when the holiday is a scheduled day off, will be
paid for the holiday at the straight-time rate.

Section 4. Five-8 Hour Shift Officers. Officers assigned to Five-8 Hour
shifts will be compensated for holidays as follows:

Officers not working the holiday, when the holiday is normally a scheduled work
day, will receive eight (8) hours pay so as not to go below a forty (40) hour work
schedule for the week.

Officers who actually work the holiday will receive the additional pay at the
overtime rate in addition to their forty-hour schedule for the week.

Officers not working the holiday, when the holiday is a scheduled day off, will be
paid for the holiday at the straight-time rate.

Section 5. Officers working ten (10) hours four days a week shall receive ten
(10) hours for their employee birthday holiday. Officers working eight (8) hour
days will receive eight (8) hours for their employee birthday holiday.

Section 6. If the city provides non-bargaining unit employees with an
additional holiday, members of the bargaining unit shall receive the additional
holiday. However, the City will not reduce the total number of holidays during
the term of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 12
FUNERAL AND PARENTAL LEAVE

Funeral leave shall be as set out in the Civil Service Rules at the time of
the execution of this Agreement.

 

428397 22
Family and medical leave shall be as set out in Administrative Policies and
Procedures FMLA Leave of Absence and City Ordinance No. 8064 at the time of
the execution of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 13
CIVIL LEAVE

All civil leave shall be granted in accordance with Section 4. of City
Ordinance No. 8064 except that an Officer will receive leave with pay for a total
of eight (8) hours. The leave for graveyard Officers will be granted in four (4)
hour increments with the last four (4) hour increments with the last four (4)
hours of the shift prior to jury duty and the remaining four (4) hour in the first
four (4) hours of the shift immediately following jury duty. For graveyard Officers
on a four 10-hour shift, the leave granted will be ten (10) hours, divided five (5)
and five (5). In the event an Officer is not selected for jury duty by 11:30 a.m.,
the Officer shall have to report to work at the regularly scheduled shift time.
Shifts will not be flexed to avoid the operation of this Article,

ARTICLE 14
LEGAL DEFENSE FOR POLICE OFFICERS

Section 1. In the event that a civil action is filed against an Officer for
conduct arising out of the official performance of police duties, the City shall
provide legal representation to said Officer under the terms and conditions of this
Article. The City shall be liable to said attorney for reimbursement of the
attorney's reasonable "out-of-pocket expenses" incurred in connection with said
representation, which shall include reasonable travel expenses, depositions and
court costs, but shall not include overhead, including but not limited to telephone
calls, secretarial services, or copying expenses and the like. Furthermore,
reasonable out-of-pocket expenses shall not exceed $500.00 per case; however,
any excess over $500.00 may be approved on an item by item basis by the City
at its sole discretion. The City shall have the option, within its sole discretion, of
hiring an outside attorney or providing legal representation through its City
Attorney's Office. Such option may be exercised by the City at any time. If the
option is exercised by the City the Officer shall be furnished a list of ten (10)
attorneys from which the Officer may choose an attorney to represent the
Officer. The list of attorneys will be compiled by the City and Association, each
furnishing five (5) attorneys for the list who have civil trial experience. The City
and Association each reserve the right to remove an attorney on the list if that
attorney is otherwise disqualified pursuant to the Texas Disciplinary Rules of
Professional Conduct. The City may remove an attorney on the list if that
attorney is currently engaged in representing an officer in civil litigation against

 

428397 : 2B
the City or any of its agents who are named parties. If either party intends to
remove an attorney for the above stated reasons it shall notify the other party in
writing at least 14 calendar days in advance of such a removal. The parties may
mutually agree at any time to remove an attorney on the list, temporarily or
permanently or fill a vacancy. In reaching an agreement to remove an attorney
from the list, neither party shall unreasonably withhold its consent or
acquiescence to the removal.

Section 2. The City shall have no obligation to provide legal
representation where:

(a) The employee's conduct giving rise to the civil action constitutes
gross or wanton negligence, recklessness, or intentional
wrongdoing;

(b) | The employee's conduct giving rise to the civil action is outside the
scope of the employee's employment; or

(c) Legal representation other than that provided by the Association or
C.L.E.A.T., Inc. is provided by a third party, such as automobile
liability insurance, errors and omissions insurance, or the like.

Section 3. A determination of the City's obligation to provide legal
representation for Officers shall initially be made by the City's attorney. If the
City's attorney makes the determination that the City should not be responsible
for representation, the City and its attorney shall have no responsibility toward
the employee unless such determination is reversed. After the initial
determination denying representation is made, the Association's attorney shall
confer with the City's attorney to decide whether the City shall provide
representation or not. If the City's attorney and the Association's attorney cannot
reach an agreement, a third attorney, mutually agreeable to the parties, or, in
the event that the parties cannot agree on a third attorney, one selected in
accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 4, Article 21, shall review the
facts and make a final and binding determination.

Section 4. All Officers accorded a legal defense by the City under this
Article shall cooperate fully with the City's attorneys and shall provide
information to the City's attorneys as requested, for the entire duration of the
case, including appeals. Where insurance coverage is available, Officers shall, in
a timely manner, notify the insurance carrier of any incident, with a copy of such
Notification to the Chief of Police. Where an insurance carrier would have
provided representation but for the Officer's failure to timely notify or cooperate

 

428397 ‘ 24
with the carrier or other conduct that justifies an insurance carrier's refusal to
represent an employee, the City shall have no obligation to provide
representation. Furthermore, any failure of the employee to cooperate with the
City's attorney or otherwise violate provisions of this Section shail be grounds for
denial of legal representation or termination of such obligation.

Section 5. No provision of this Article shall in any way affect other
rights or remedies that the City may have.

ARTICLE 15
SICK LEAVE

Section 1. An employee shall accumulate sick leave at the rate of 10
hours per month from the first day of employment.

Section 2. An employee has unlimited accumulation of sick leave.

Section 3. As an incentive to minimize abuse of sick leave, an employee
shall be allowed to use, subject to the needs of the department, 40 hours of the
allotted 120 hours sick leave per year for personal business, either on an hourly or
full-day basis.

Section 4. An officer shall be allowed to take sick leave with pay for
immediate family related illnesses. Such request must be made at least one hour
prior to the officer's shift and shall be limited to two days per occasion.

Section 5. Workers’ compensation appeals shall be filed with the Texas
Division of Workers’ Compensation of the Texas Department of Insurance.
Accident with pay (AWP) appeals shall be processed in accordance with Section
4.4 of City Ordinance No. 8064. The AWP provisions will comply with Ordinance
8064, Section 4.4 or any revisions to this Ordinance, with the following
modifications:

(a) The requirement to report an occupational injury within 48 hours will
be measured from the point that the Officer knew s/he had received a work-
related injury if the Officer had no reasonable basis to suspect s/he was injured.
For the purpose of this Agreement, the date of the occurrence of an injury is the
date the employee knew or should have known the injury was job related.

(b) AWP is an employer's salary supplement that is payable when an
Officer sustains an injury or illness covered by workers compensation, Officers
who receive an injury or illness while engaged in a law enforcement related

 

428397 . 25
activity which activity would require peace officer status may be granted AWP
status extensions in sixty (60) calendar day increments, after the initial injury
leave, if they provide current medical evidence which indicates such Officer has a
recoverable injury or illness. Current medical evidence will be provided to the
Chief and will reflect any change in the Officer’s status. A report of current
medical status from the Officer's treating physician shall suffice as current
medical evidence. A “recoverable injury or illness” means such injury or illness,
that when the Officer is released to return to work, the Officer will in the opinion
of his or her physician, be able to perform the essential functions of the position
which were required at the time of the injury or illness. While on AWP employees
shall not be required to use sick leave or vacation leave. Employees shall
continue to accrue all sick and vacation leave while on AWP status.

(c) If AWP leave is approved, AWP leave will be available for the first
seven (7) calendar days of disability not initially paid by workers’ compensation
benefits. The officer will not be required to use annual or sick leave for this first
seven days of disability.

Section 6. The Police Chief retains the right to require a medical
certificate in a form satisfactory to the Chief before an employee shall be paid sick
leave under the provisions of this Article.

Section 7. The employee, the employee's heirs or the employee's legal
representative shall be compensated in cash for any unused accumulation of sick
leave up to the maximum of 700 hours at the employee's basic hourly rate of pay,
at the time of the employee's death, resignation, termination or retirement. In the
case of any unused accumulation of sick leave in excess of 700 hours, an employee
who has completed ten years service, the employee's heirs or the employee's legal
representative shall be compensated in cash for such hours of unused sick leave in
excess of 700 hours up to a maximum of 1200 hours in an amount equal to one
hour's pay for every four hours of unused, accumulated sick leave at the
employee's hourly rate of pay, at the time of the employee's death, resignation,
retirement or termination.

Section 8. Any employee who is entitled to receive accumulated sick
leave cash compensation under this Article shall have the option to be paid the
same in a lump sum payment. If, during the term of this Agreement, the City
allows substantially all non-bargaining unit employees to apply such compensation
to payment of the employee's share of costs associated with his retirement health
insurance, it shall also allow bargaining unit employees to do so under the same
terms.

 

428397 26
Section 9. Shared Leave Program.
A. POLICY:

This program allows covered employees to voluntarily donate accrued sick
and/or vacation leave to a bank for the use of, and to help alleviate the financial
hardship caused by “catastrophic injuries or illnesses” or “life-threatening
illnesses or injuries” as defined herein, which force an employee to exhaust all
paid leave time earned and subsequently lose compensation from the City.

This policy does not circumvent the application of the Family and Medical Leave
Act (FMLA) nor does it alter or revise any City policy or procedure regarding the
application of the FMLA. Nothing in this policy shall be construed so as to be a
legal entitlement to receive a leave of absence nor to obligate the City to grant a
leave of absence except as may be granted to an employee pursuant to the City
Charter and the Administrative Policies and Procedures FMLA Leave of Absence.
Employees who are not taking FMLA leave nor been granted a leave of absence
are not permitted to receive shared leave under this policy.

Shared Sick Leave is a benefit available to covered employees within the
parameters of this program and any Shared Leave granted is not considered
earned sick leave for which a covered employee may be compensated for cash
upon the employee's death, resignation, termination or retirement pursuant to
Article 15, Section 8. Any unused Shared Leave reverts back to the program in
accordance with Section 9, I of this Article.

B. DEFINITIONS:

1. “Administrator” means the person or persons designated as Administrator
by the Board of the El Paso Municipal Police Officers Association.

2. “Bank” means the combined sick and vacation leave donated by covered
employees for allocation to eligible recipients.

3. “Board” means the Shared Leave Bank Board which consists of the
authorized designees of the EPMPOA.

4. “CBA” means the Articles of Agreement by and between the City of El
Paso and the El Paso Municipal Police Officers Association (EPMPOA).

5. “Life-threatening illness or injury” is defined as a severe medical condition,
identified as life-threatening by a medical doctor, which is non-job-related

 

428397 , 27
and which has a prolonged negative effect on the covered employee's or
family member's health and incapacitates the employee or family member
for an extended period of time. Such conditions require in-patient hospital
care, or prolonged out-patient care as determined to be medically
necessary by a licensed physician.

6. Such conditions include but are not limited to Cancer, AIDS, Heart Attack
and Stroke.

7. “Catastrophic Injury or Illness” is defined as an unanticipated, non-job
related, not self inflicted injury or illness, and requires a covered
employee's absence without pay for a period of at least two weeks after
all leave balances have been exhausted. This is further defined as those
illnesses or accidents including vehicle accidents requiring confinement in
a hospital or accidents requiring extensive medical care of an
unforeseeable nature. Examples include life threatening injury or illness,
cancer, AIDS, heart surgery, stroke, etc. Catastrophic illness or injury
shall not include elective surgery or unforeseeable medical care rendered
as a result of something other than injury or disease.

8. “Contributor” means a covered employee who voluntarily provides a
written request for transfer or his/her sick or vacation leave to the bank.

9. “Covered Employee” means those employees (police officers) who are
covered by the terms of the CBA and who meet the requirements set forth
under this section for eligibility as a recipient.

10.“Recipient” means an eligible covered employee whom the Administrator
has approved to receive leave from the bank.

11.“Work day” means any day normally or regularly scheduled for the
transaction of business.

12.“Family member” means spouse, child or parent.
on PROGRAM RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Administrator is responsible for:

1. Reviewing requests from applicants to decide if the covered employee's
situation qualifies for the program and determining the amount of leave to be

  

C1003

428397 28
assigned from the bank up to the eligible amounts of both designated and
undesignated contributions.

2. Publicizing the program and the need for contributions. Such publicizing
will be done upon establishment of the bank and periodically thereafter when the
Administrator determines that there is an insufficient leave balance to meet
requests. Publicizing will be done in a manner that is cost effective, as
determined by the Administrator.

3. Keeping records of all requests to either donate leave to the bank or
receive leave from the bank, and the appropriate action taken on each request.

4, Forwarding all approved requests of donors and recipients to the
designated EPMPOA member acting on behalf of the administrator.

5. Crediting the Shared Leave Bank with the amount of time contributed by
the donor and shall deduct a corresponding amount of time from the donor's
accrued sick or vacation leave balance. Based on the information provided by the
Administrator, an appropriate notation will be made on the donor's sick or
vacation leave record that the leave was donated to the Shared Leave Bank.

6. Advising the City to credit the approved amount of leave taken from the
bank to the sick leave account of the recipient. An appropriate notation will be
made on the recipient’s sick leave record that the leave was received from the
Shared Leave Bank.

7. Advising each prospective donor and recipient of the action taken on their
request.

8. Notifying the Payroll and Records Supervisor when an approved leave
recipient loses their right to continue participation in the Shared Leave Program.

9. Providing a quarterly report to the Chief of Police regarding the numbers
of hours collected and used by covered employees under this program, and the
balance of hours contained in the undesignated pool of contributions.

D. | MEDICAL CONSULTATION:
A Medical Consultant selected by the Administrator may advise the

Administrator on whether a request qualifies as either a life threatening injury or
illness or qualifies as a catastrophic injury or illness or both categories, and

 

428397 mS 29
whether or not the injury is known to be recoverable in consideration of the job
duties of the covered employee.

E. APPLYING TO BECOME A RECIPIENT.

1. A covered employee must have exhausted all of his/her available accrued
leaves (including Special Sick Leave as authorized) before being eligible to apply for
Shared Leave.

2. The covered employee or authorized representative must complete the
Shared Leave Application Form and send it, with the Medical Certification Form
attached, to the Administrator via Office of the Chief. THE NAME OF THE
RECIPIENT WILL BE KEPT CONFIDENTIAL TO THE EXTENT ALLOWED BY LAW,
unless the employee authorizes the release of information contained in the
application form or within the supporting documentation by the City to publicize the
reason for the need for leave to potential donors.

3. The Medical Certification should indicate the:

a. Nature of the illness or injury for which the physician is treating the
covered employee or covered employee's family member;

b. The diagnosis; and

c. Whether or not the condition qualifies as either a life-threatening
injury or illness or qualifies as a catastrophic injury or illness or
both categories, and whether or not the injury is known to be
recoverable in consideration of the job duties of the covered
employee.

The Medical Certification form must be submitted with the request. If the Medical
Certification form is incomplete, the request will be denied

F. CONTRIBUTING LEAVE

1. Contributions. Covered employees wishing to donate leave should
complete the Shared Leave Contribution Form and submit it directly to the
Administrator or the Administrator's designee.

2. Covered employees may be informed of the need for contributions by work
section, division or department as deemed appropriate by the Administrator. The
Chief of Police will take appropriate steps to ensure that no undue pressure or

 

428397 30
coercion, either implicit or explicit, is placed on any individual employee by any
other employee to make a donation.

3. Covered employees may contribute not less that 8 hours nor more than 80
hours of accrued leave per fiscal year. Separating covered employees must submit
their contribution request at least 30 days before their effective separation date.

4. A covered employee contributing sick leave must have at least 120 hours of
sick leave left in their account after making their contribution. Covered employees
having less than 120 hours of sick leave in their account will be denied the
opportunity to contribute sick leave at that time, but may resubmit a request to
contribute after their accrued sick leave balance is increased to the level where the
covered employee would have at least 120 hours of sick leave left after making
their contribution.

5. A covered employee contributing vacation leave must be eligible to use
vacation leave and have at least 40 hours of vacation leave in their account after
making their contribution, or they will be denied the opportunity to contribute
vacation leave at that time.

6. All donation of leave to the shared leave balance are strictly voluntary, but
in order for covered employees to become eligible to receive leave form the shared
leave balance, they must donate at least 8 hours of leave to the shared leave
balance at the beginning of each calendar year, or they shall relinquish their
eligibility to withdraw leave from the shared leave balance for that calendar year.
Covered employees with less than 1 year on the job, beginning on the date of
graduation from the academy or other initially-required training, are eligible to use
the shared leave program and are exempt from the obligation to donate leave as a
requirement for eligibility.

G. ELIGIBLE RECIPIENT

1. Shared leave may be utilized from the undesignated pool of contributions
only because of a life-threatening injury or illness of the covered employee. Shared
leave may be designated to specific individuals using the catastrophic injury and
illness as well as the life-threatening injury and illness definitions. Shared leave
may also be requested on behalf of covered employees whose absence is required
to care for family members who meet the definition of catastrophic injury or illness,
in each case to be fully documented as required by the Administrator.

2. An eligible recipient will be granted up to 80 days (calculated based on eight
hour days) per fiscal year of leave designated for him/her by name. Recipients

 

428397 31
lacking sufficient designated contributions may draw leave from the undesignated
contribution area of the bank in an amount that is the lesser of one-sixth (1/6) of
the total leave in the undesignated area of the bank or up to 80 days. The
Administrator shall determine the exact amount that an eligible recipient may draw
from the undesignated area of the bank based upon the leave balance in the bank
at the time the request is approved. Under no circumstances may a recipient draw
over 80 days per fiscal year.

3. A recipient absent on Shared Leave (that is, leave received from the bank) is
treated for all purposes as if the recipient were absent on earned sick leave, i.e.,
he/she would be eligible for paid holidays, normal payroll deductions would be
made, and paid leave would be accrued.

4. Acovered employee is ineligible to receive Shared Leave if the employee:

a. Has a pattern indicative of sick leave misuse within the past 12
months (from the date of the Shared Leave request)

b. Is seeking to receive leave for an occupational (i.e., on-the-job)
illness or injury. Provided, however, any qualified employee whose report of
injury has been disputed by the City’s Workers Compensation Third Party
Administrator and where no final determination of comparability has been
made shall be eligible to make conditional request for leave in accordance
with the terms of this policy. Such request is upon the condition that in the
event the injury is determined to be a compensable injury under the
Workers Compensation Act, the employee is deemed to agree to and will
cooperate with the City to make the shared leave program and/or the City of
El Paso whole for any leave that the employee had received from the
program, including but not limited to an agreement that the City may deduct
any overpayment from future paychecks or reduce any accrued leave
balances.

c Is on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces or has been recalled to
duty to receive treatment.

H. APPEALS.

1. Decisions made by the Administrator, in regard to a covered employee's
eligibility to receive shared leave, shall be subject to appeal to the Shared Leave
Bank Board. The Board shall meet as required by the Administrator and decide
appeals by majority vote. A tie vote will leave the Administrator's decision in place.
The Administrator and/or Shared Leave Bank Board may request additional

 

428397 32
information to determine if a condition qualifies as either a catastrophic injury or
illness or a life-threatening injury or illness.

I. TERMINATION OF BENEFITS.

1. The participating covered employee will immediately lose their right to
Shared Leave benefits and all unused Shared Leave in their sick leave account will
revert to the Shared Leave Bank if the employee:

Dies;

Separates from employment;

Voluntarily cancels his/her participation in the Shared Leave Program;
Exhausts the maximum approved Shared Leave given to the employee;
Commits fraud or misrepresentation in the request or use of Shared
Leave benefits.

panos

2. The estate of a deceased covered employee (recipient) is not entitled to any
benefit for unused leave acquired by that employee from the Shared Leave Bank.
Any such unused leave will revert to the Shared Leave Bank.

Section 10. The members of the collective bargaining unit shall be subject
to City’s Return to Duty with Medical or Physical Restrictions Policy in effect upon
execution of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 16
JOB RELATED DISABILITIES

Section 1. In the event an employee is injured while in the
performance of work for an off duty employer, the following shall happen:

(a) If injury or sickness is related to a non-related police officer's
activity then there is no liability of any nature on the part of the
City of El Paso.

(b) If injury or sickness is related to a police officer's performance of a
law enforcement function then employee is to first look to the off
duty employer for worker's compensation; if the off duty employer
does not carry worker's compensation insurance then a claim may
be filed under the City's worker's compensation and the employee
agrees to cooperate with the City in any subrogation actions. The
employee shall provide proof that the off duty employer does not
carry worker's compensation as of the date of the injury. The

 

428397 33
employee shall be relieved of this responsibility if the employee
presents a certified letter showing delivery to the off duty employer
and has received no response. The City shall prepare the letter for
the employee's signature.

(c) The City will pay the difference between worker's compensation
weekly benefits and the employee's base salary. This amount will
be deducted against the employee's sick leave; if sick leave is
exhausted prior to termination of worker's compensation weekly
benefits, the City will continue to pay the difference.

Section 2. The City shall give any officers authorized accident with pay
status under Section 4 of City Ordinance No. 8064, at least fifteen (15) working
days prior written notice of intent to terminate the officer's accident pay with
status. A copy of said notice shall be forwarded by certified mail to the President
of the Association on the same date it is delivered or mailed to the officer.

ARTICLE 17
LEAVE FOR ASSOCIATION BUSINESS

Section 1. Prior to the beginning of collective bargaining negotiations,
the Association shall designate who shall constitute its bargaining team. For each
of the officers so designated, the City shall treat as time worked time spent in
actual collective bargaining negotiating sessions with the City's bargaining team
during which said employee was otherwise scheduled to work. Promptly upon
the conclusion of each such session, any such employee shall report to work at
the employee's regularly scheduled assignment or where directed by the Police
Chief.

Section 2. Up to three members of the Association's Board shall be
permitted time off without loss of pay at any one time to conduct elections
relating to Association business. The President of the Association shall give 72
hours prior notice to the Chief as to the time and place for such election, and the
names of the members of the Executive Board who will be conducting the
election.

Section 3. Within ten days after the execution of this Agreement, the
Association shall notify the Chief in writing as to the names of the Association's
Executive Board, The Association shall thereafter promptly notify the Chief of any
change in the composition of its Executive Board. To the extent that any
designated member(s) of the Association's Executive Board is otherwise
scheduled to work, the member shall be permitted to attend the monthly

 

428397 34
Association membership meeting and the monthly Association Executive Board
meeting and upon 24 hour notice, any specially called Executive Board meetings,
and said meeting time shall be treated as time worked.

Section 4. Each year on or before January 1, the City shall assess from
each Association member three (3) hours of accrued vacation leave time to be
placed in an Association business leave pool. The Association shall be allowed to
debit the pool during the calendar year when Association officers are required to
administer the contract; represent the Association at meetings or events;
represent members at disciplinary hearings, grievances or on other job-related
matters; attend seminars or training programs; any business associated with
collective bargaining or conduct other Association business. The Association shall
notify the Chief of Police at least 48 hours in advance of such time off. The pool
shall be cumulative during the term of this Agreement. The City is only required
to make an individual assessment from Association members who have at least
three (3) hours of accrued vacation time at the time the City makes the
assessment. The Chief of Police must give his express written approval to any
Association request to use the pool for more than ten (10) members at any one
time. If the Chief of Police declares an emergency, he may order the Association
President or any Association officers on Association business leave time to report
to work for the pendency of the emergency. An emergency is an unexpected
happening or event or unforeseen situation or crisis that calls for immediate
action and requires the Chief of Police to order the Association President or
officers to report to work.

Section 5. The Chief will consider requests for additional time off
without pay to attend to other Association business.

Section 6. Legislative leave under Sections 614.001-614.010, Texas
Government Code, is amended to allow one officer who is eligible under this law
to be granted legislative leave to appear before or petition the Texas Legislature
and U.S. Congress to request annual legislative leave in one year increments
from the date the leave is granted by the Chief of Police. All requirements in
Chapter 614 for reimbursement by the officer to the City shall apply.
Reimbursement shall be 100% of all city costs, including but not limited to,
wages, health insurance benefits, and pension for the one officer.

  

C1003

428397 35
ARTICLE 18
SAFETY AND HEALTH

Section 1.

(a)

(b)

()

The City shall ensure that all police vehicles and equipment assigned to
police officers are in safe condition and shall maintain a preventive
maintenance program for police vehicles. Any insurance funds received for
Department vehicles wrecked beyond repair will be reserved for the
Department’s Fleet replacement fund. By September 30, 2016, the City will
develop and thereafter follow a vehicle replacement program.

If an Officer believes that a police vehicle or equipment assigned to the
Officer is not in safe condition, the Officer may inform the supervisor of the
unsafe condition of the vehicle or equipment. The supervisor shall make a
decision as to the safety of the vehicle or equipment. In the event the
Officer disagrees with the supervisor's decision, the Officer may note an
objection in writing to PD Risk Management with a copy being forwarded to
the Association. The supervisor shall acknowledge, in writing, the Officer's
objection.

It is the desire of the City and the Association to maintain the high
standards of safety in the police department in order to eliminate, as much
as possible, accidents, deaths and injuries in the police service. To this end,
a Safety Committee will be established to make reports and
recommendations to the Chief of Police and the City’s Deputy Director of
Human Resources in charge of Risk Management. The Association President
will select four (4) members, including one from Patrol and one from
Detective Division. This committee will meet upon request by any of its
members within five (5) business days subject to approval of the Chief.
Members of this committee will be granted time off with pay when meeting
jointly or for any inspections or investigations of safety problems in the
police department. The City will cooperate in providing information which is
reasonably necessary for the committee to fulfill its purpose.

Section 2. The City will conduct police academies as it determines is

necessary to provide sufficient Officers to do the work of the Department.
Commencing FY2016, if the City's actual total tax revenues exceed the prior fiscal
year's actual tax revenues (excluding debt services) by 1.5% and all revenues for
the year are greater than zero with respect to the current fiscal year's budgeted
revenue, the City agrees to schedule a police academy for the following fiscal year.
The City will continue to schedule police academies for the duration of the
Agreement as long as the above standard is met.

 

428397 36
Section 3. The Chief and the Association shall meet to discuss the
development of a physical fitness assessment model, adjusted for age and gender.
Any agreement reached shall be adopted as a Pilot Program through a
Memorandum of understanding and ratified by the parties, and attached as an
appendix to this Agreement. The parties will make every effort to implement such a
program no later than one year from the signing of the Agreement.

Section 4. The City commits not less than $100,000.00 in each year of
this contract for vehicle replacement.

ARTICLE 19
PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS

Section 1. Promotional eligibility lists shall expire eighteen months after
the initial date of approval. For all ranks of Lieutenant or below, a new
promotional eligibility exam shall be given no later than thirty days following the
expiration of the previous promotional eligibility list. The City shall not be
required to schedule a new promotional examination for the rank of Commander
unless and until a new eligibility list is needed. The Chief retains the right to fill
vacant positions within the department as needed and with the City's budgetary
constraints.

Section 2. On November ist of each year, the Chief of Police shall
establish a committee for the selection of study materials for the written
promotional examination for each rank. Such materials which are selected shall
be reviewed by the Chief of Police who shall make the final selection. A listing of
all potential materials from which promotional examination questions may be
taken from will be posted annually each January for examinations to be
administered within the one-year period beginning the following April. Such
material may not be used unless available from publishing companies more than
ninety (90) days prior to examination. Each material selected will be used to
formulate one or more questions of the examination.

The annual posting and promotional requirements shall not apply to
testing procedures commenced before the date this Agreement is signed.

Section 3. For promotional examinations for each class title given after
the effective date of this Agreement, the City shall post a notice of said
examination at least 60 days prior to the date of examination.

 

428397 " 37
Section 4. The written examination protest procedure shall be as
follows:

(a) The protest period for written police promotional examinations will
be limited to one two-hour period to be scheduled at the mutual convenience of
the Human Resources Department and the police officer during the two
consecutive working days following the administration of the written
examination. The protest schedule will depend on the size of applicant group and
the availability of space and Human Resources staff. Several sessions may be
scheduled if necessary to handle large groups. However, each individual will be
allowed to attend only one session. The time(s) will be announced prior to or at
the time of the written examination.

(b) An individual may seek and make notes about the individual's
marked answer sheet with the number of correct and incorrect responses for the
initial 15 minutes of the two-hour period.

(a) During the subsequent 1 hour and 45 minutes after handing in the
marked answer sheet, the following materials will be available to examinees:

« unmarked test booklet;

¢ correct answers to questions;

e reference materials (examinee must provide);
© protest forms.

(b) At the end of two hours, all protests must be turned in to Human
Resources Department staff. Protests on additional items will not be accepted
after this time. Any individual attending such session may write down the
number(s) of the test questions protested or missed and remove such written
Notations from the test room. No other notes or papers shall be carried out by
any individual attending such a session.

(c) _ Protested questions will be reviewed by a committee consisting of
Police Association and Department representatives and Human Resources staff.
Decisions made by this committee will be final.

(f) | The disposition of protested items will be posted as soon as
possible after the close of the protest period. This list will contain only the
number of the protested question and action taken. For example:

 

428397 38
#85 protest allowed; question deleted
#95 protest disallowed.

Section 5. During the term of this Agreement, a committee consisting
of representatives of the City and the Association shall meet diligently to explore
mutually satisfactory improvements in the procedure for the examination of
applicants for promotions to class grade P-2 through P-6.

Section 6. The results of any Assessment Center shall not be subject to
grievances or the arbitration process but may be subject to the protest
procedure of City's Examinations Rating Policy, Section ii. The City shall have the
right to weigh Assessment Center up to 50% of the total score for Sergeants and
Lieutenants and 65% for all ranks above Lieutenants. Only the top 25 scorers on
the Sergeant's written examination, the top 18 scorers on the Lieutenant's
examination and the top 18 scorers on the Commander's written examination
shall be orally examined at an Assessment Center.

Each assessor with regard to each exercise in the Assessment Center shall rate
each participant on each dimension being evaluated on a written form. For
Assessment Centers at all ranks, the employees shall have the right to review the
evaluation from such examinations. At the employee's request, such written
evaluation shall be explained during a feedback session by a Police Department
advisor to the Center.

The City shall establish and announce a minimum passing score on all written
examinations prior to such examinations.

Assessment Center Administrators shall receive professional training in the
administration of centers by external experts in the field within six months after
the date of signing of this Agreement. Such training must be updated within
each succeeding three-year period.

Section 7. The Civil Service Provisions and the Civil Service Rules
pursuant thereto, shall in all respects govern in promotions except that:

(a) To the score of the applicant for promotion to Detective, Sergeant,
Lieutenant and Commander shall be added one point for each of the first four
complete years and one-half point for each additional complete year of actual
service to a maximum of seven points in the position from which promotion is
sought; efficiency points shall not be added to or subtracted from the
examination score of applicants for promotion to Detective, Sergeant, Lieutenant

 

428397 : 39
or Commander notwithstanding any writing to the contrary. Seniority will be
computed to and including the day the final scores are submitted by the
Assessors of the Assessment Center.

(b) | An employee who is on a certified list will not be removed from
such list until he has been non-selected for promotion five times.

(c) | Promotion to Deputy Chief and Assistant Chief positions shall be
made pursuant to Article 2, Section 3 of this Agreement.

Section 8. The educational and experience requirements for
promotional examinations shall be determined and applied by the City in
accordance with applicable City Charter provisions and/or Civil Service Rules. The
interpretation. of education requirements shall parallel Article 6, Section 2 of this
Agreement. :

An employee may substitute experience for no more than one-half of the college
education requirement based on the following equivalencies:

3.0 semester credit hours = 1.8 months experience
15.0 semester credit hours = 9 months experience
30.0 semester credit hours = 18 months experience

Section 9. The "Rule of Five" will continue to govern the selection of Officers
from promotional eligibility lists.

Section 10. An Officer who leave the Department due to FMLA-related reasons
and is rehired will not be subjected to the civil service requirement of having to
be re-employed for two years before being eligible for a promotional exam.

ARTICLE 20
REINSTATEMENT AFTER RESIGNATION

When an employee is reinstated to duty pursuant to Section 6.10-7 of the
City Charter in the same classification after separation from the City due to
resignation and subsequent reinstatement, such employee may, upon
recommendation of the Chief, be reinstated to the same step or level received at
the time of resignation. Before proceeding to the next grade and step, the
Officer must complete the amount of time required to complete the grade and
step the Officer occupied prior to the separation from the City.

Where a break in service occurs, by reason of resignation;

 

428397 ‘ 40
1. longevity credits accrued prior to the break in service
shall be counted for the purpose of Section 3.6B of City Ordinance No. 8064.
2. credit for Leave Benefits (Vacation, Sick Leave) accrued prior to the break
in service shall be included to calculate the accrual date and
corresponding rate. The accrual date will be adjusted to reflect the time the
Officer was separated from the City to ensure the Officer will not get service
credit for the time the Officer was not employed by the City.

3. Where a break of service occurs by reason of resignation, the employee's
seniority time will be deducted by the length of time the employee was
separated from the El Paso Police Department. The use of seniority time
examples include calculating seniority points on promotional exams,
seniority for shift bids.

In cases where an employee is reinstated as result of arbitration or settlement,
the methodology used in Article 20 shall be utilized if not specifically addressed
in the arbitration or settlement.

Example: John Doe becomes a commissioned peace officer.
Original Start Date as Police Officer: 12/04/08

Resignation date: 2/23/10 Reinstatement date:06/05/12
Longevity date: 12/04/08 Longevity date: 03/18/11
Longevity rate: 1.85 Longevity rate: 1.85
Vacation Accrual date: 12/04/08 Vacation Accrual date: 03/18/11
Vacation Accrual rate: 4.62 Vacation Accrual rate: 4.62
ARTICLE 21
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 1. Disciplinary Appeals

A. Appeals of suspensions, demotions and/or terminations shall be
heard by a hearing examiner selected on a rotating basis from the hearing
examiner panel. In the case of a demotion, a termination, or a suspension of
more than 40-hours, the employee may elect to have the disciplinary appeal
heard by an arbitrator selected in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section 3. An employee's election of arbitration automatically waives that
Employee's right to proceed before a hearing examiner; and an employee's
election to proceed before a hearing examiner automatically waives that
employee's right to arbitration. The decision of the Hearing Examiner or the

 

428397 41
Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the employee(s) involved, the City and
the Association, subject to any rights of appeal to a court of law. During the
hearing of an appeal or an arbitration, the parties shall have the right to have a
representative and an advocate of their choosing present.

B. The hearing examiner panel shall have not less than five (5)
qualified members appointed by the City and Association by mutual agreement.
The members on the panel shall serve a one-year term, which will automatically
renew on the anniversary of their appointment, subject to the procedures set
forth herein. Either party may remove a member of the panel by providing
written notice to the other party within thirty (30) days before the panel
member's anniversary date, along with the name of at least one (1) proposed
replacement panel member. The City and the Association may, at any time,
remove and/or add members by mutual agreement. If there is a vacancy, such
as by resignation, death, unilateral removal or agreed-upon removal, the City
and the Association shall act promptly to select enough new members to ensure
that the panel contains not less than five (5) active members. The Civil Service
Commission shall create a list of the hearing examiners, placed in random order,
and shall designate a hearing examiner for each appeal on a rotating basis,
subject to the hearing examiner's availability.

Section 2. Contract Grievances

Disputes involving the application, interpretation or enforcement of this
Agreement, but not involving the suspension, demotion or termination of an
employee, shall be resolved in the following manner:

A. Individual Grievances.

1. If the grievance is initiated by an individual employee, rather than
the Association, the aggrieved employee shall, within 14-calendar days after the
actual or constructive knowledge of the acts or omissions giving rise to the
grievance, discuss the grievance with his or her immediate supervisor and
attempt to resolve the matter. The supervisor involve shall give an oral answer
with respect to the dispute immediately, if possible, but not later than 14-
calendar days following the end of the discussion.

2. If the immediate supervisor's oral answer does not settle the issue
to the employee's satisfaction, the employee shall, within 7-calendar days
following the earlier of: (a) the receipt of the oral answer; or (b) the supervisor's
deadline for providing the oral answer, present the grievance in writing and
signed by the employee to the Association's Grievance Committee. The

 

428397 : 42
Grievance Committee shall have full authority to determine whether to proceed
further with any employee's grievance. If the Committee decides to proceed with
the grievance, it shall reduce the grievance to final written form and present the
written grievance to the Chief of Police, the City Attorney and the City Manager
within 14-calendar days following the Grievance Committee's receipt of the
grievance from the employee. The grievance presented by the Grievance
Committee must generally describe the alleged acts or omissions, and indicate
the specific Articles allegedly violated.

B. Association Grievances.

If two or more employees are alleged to be affected, the Association may
file a grievance on its own behalf. An Association Grievance must be in writing
and served upon the Chief of Police, the City. Attorney and the City Manager
within 14 days of the Association's actual or constructive knowledge of the acts
or omissions giving rise to the grievance. The written grievance must generally
describe the alleged acts or omissions, and indicate the specific Articles allegedly
violated. To the greatest extent possible, the grievance should identify the
affected employees, either by name or category.

C. Procedures Applicable to Both Individual & Association Grievances

1. The Chief of Police or the City Manager (or an authorized
representative of either), and the City Attorney's Office shall, within 14-calendar
days following receipt of a grievance, meet with the Association's
representative(s) (and the aggrieved employee, if an individual grievance) and
with their attorney, to discuss the grievance. Within 14-calendar days following
said meeting, the Chief of Police, the City Manager (or an authorized
representative of either) or the City Attorney's Office shall submit a written
response to the Association.

2. If the grievance remains unresolved, the Association may, within
14-calendar days following the conclusion of Section C.1. above, either: (a)
notify the City Attorney in writing that it desires to submit the matter to
mediation; and/or (b) notify the City Attorney in writing that it desires to submit
the matter to final and binding arbitration. Upon receipt of the notice of intent to
arbitrate, the City Attorney's Office shall immediately request a list of seven
arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association. However, if the City agrees
to a mediation request, the City Attorney need not request an arbitrator list from
AAA until after mediation is completed.

 

428397 , 43
Section 3. General Rules for Hearings

A. The provisions in this Section apply equally to Discipline Appeals
and Contract Grievances, unless otherwise indicated.

B. The parties may, by mutual agreement, submit a matter to non-
binding mediation at any time.

Cc. Upon the receipt of the list of arbitrators, each party shall alternate
in striking a name from the list until only one name remains, and each party shall
act diligently to coordinate a date for the hearing. The parties may, by
agreement and either before or after requesting a list of arbitrators, select any
arbitrator without regard to that arbitrator's affiliation with the American
Arbitration Association.

D. Witness Lists & Documents

1. Either party may, no later than 14-calendar days before the date of
the hearing, request from the other party: (a) the names of witnesses expected
to be called at the hearing; (b) any statements of witnesses expected to be
called not coming within the attorney's work product privilege; and (c) the other
party's exhibits. The foregoing must be provided to the requesting party no later
than 7 days before the hearing. Failure of a party to timely provide the name of
a witness, a copy of the witness’ non-privileged statement, or an exhibit shall
preclude the party from calling the individual as a witness or offering the exhibit
into evidence, unless the hearing examiner or arbitrator finds good cause for
such failure.

2. When disciplinary action in the nature of a five (5) day suspension
or greater, a reduction, or discharge is being contemplated by the Department
Head, the employee must be served with a notice of proposed disciplinary action
which shall conform with the notice requirements set forth in Section 2 and
Section 3(b) of Rule 8, El Paso Civil Service Rules and Regulations, as constituted
on the effective date of this Agreement. In addition to the notice of proposed
disciplinary action, the employee shall be furnished with the written materials
and tangible things in the possession of the Department Head that form the
factual and evidentiary basis for the proposed disciplinary action. No matter may
be withheld from the employee that is inconsistent with the theory of discipline
or that could tend to mitigate the contemplated sanction. The foregoing shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the entire Internal Affairs investigative
file.

 

428397 , 44
3. In all Disciplinary Appeals, the City shall provide the employee with
the materials required by Paragraph D.2., no later than thirty (30) days after a
hearing examiner or arbitrator is selected, unless the City has already provided
such materials.

E. The hearing examiner or arbitrator may grant continuances upon a
showing of good cause or upon mutual agreement by both the legal counsel for
the City and the aggrieved employee or Association. All issues of jurisdiction or
procedural arbitrability shall be decided by the hearing examiner or arbitrator
before the final hearing. The parties will make every effort to have all
preliminary issues heard by submission. Disputes involving the enforcement or
interpretation of a prior decision by a hearing examiner or arbitrator shall be
resolved by the hearing examiner or arbitrator who decided the underlying
dispute. If the same hearing examiner or arbitrator is not available, then the
parties will use the same procedures for selecting a hearing examiner or
arbitrator that were used in the underlying dispute.

F. The hearing examiner or neutral arbitrator shall have the authority
to interpret the Agreement, to make conclusions of fact based upon the evidence
submitted at the proceeding and to apply the contractual provisions to said facts.
The jurisdiction of the hearing examiner or arbitrator is limited in that he or she
has no authority to add to, subtract from, amend or otherwise change or in any
way modify the provisions of this Agreement. In Disciplinary Appeals, the
hearing examiner or arbitrator shall have the authority to: (a) sustain discipline;
(b) reverse discipline (except that discipline shall not be increased); (c) modify
discipline; and, (d) as applicable, award back pay, in whole or in part. In cases
of termination or indefinite suspension, the hearing examiner or arbitrator has
discretion to reinstate an employee and impose an unpaid suspension,

notwithstanding the ruling in City of Waco_v. Kelley, 309 S.W.3d 536 (Tex.
2010).

G. The decision of the hearing examiner or arbitrator, if rendered in
accordance with the provisions of Section F. of this Article, shall be final and
binding upon the Association, all bargaining unit employees, and the City.

H. All time limits in this Agreement are based on calendar days. If a
time limit expires on a weekend or City-observed holiday, the time limit shall be
extended to the next City business day. The day of the act, event, or default
shall not be included.

lL The fee and expenses of a hearing examiner or arbitrator shall be
borne equally by the City and the Association.

 

428397 , 45
ARTICLE 22
BULLETIN BOARD

Section 1. The City shall permit the Association sufficient access to its
bulletin boards to permit the Association reasonably to communicate with its
members covered by this Agreement. The Association shall use this board for
posting of notices pertaining to recreational and social activities, Association
elections, reports of the Association or its committees, Association meeting
notices and legislative enactments and judicial decisions affecting public
employee labor relations. The Association shall not post any materials which are
obscene, defamatory, impair the operation of the City or the Police Department
or which constitute partisan political campaign material. Prior to the posting of
any item, the Association shall send a copy of the item to the Chief.

Section 2. Any material on the bulletin board which the Chief believes
to be in violation of this Agreement shall be promptly removed by the
Association. Any dispute about whether material removed at the direction of the
Chief is in violation of this Article may be submitted directly to Step 2 of the
grievance procedure contained in Article 21.

ARTICLE 23
NONDISCRIMINATION

Section 1. | Membership in the Association is voluntary. Each Officer has
the right to refrain from joining or to withdraw from membership in the
Association, as the Officer sees fit. Neither the Association nor the City shall
exert any pressure against any Officer covered by this Agreement in regard to
such matters.

Section 2. The City and the Association agree that the provisions of this
Agreement shall be applied to all Officers within the bargaining unit without
regard to membership or non-membership in the Association or activity or lack of
activity on its behalf.

Section 3. Upon receipt of a voluntarily signed authorization of an
employee covered by this Agreement, the City agrees to deduct from each
employee’s earnings and pay to the Association bi-weekly during the life of this
Agreement a single lump sum payment in the amount to be determined by the
employee, plus a single special assessment of up to $5.00. The latter special
assessment shall be withheld only upon notification by the Association to the City
that such amount is being uniformly assessed to all members of the Association.
The Association shall certify to the Comptroller that all members of the

 

428397 ‘ 46
Association have been notified of the assessment at least 30 days prior to the
date on which the assessment will be withheld. The employee shall have the
right to revoke any such authorization at any time by written notification to the
City Comptroller’s Office.

Section 4. The form of such individual authorization shall contain the
following language:

I hereby authorize the City of El Paso to deduct each pay day the sum of
$. as certified by the El Paso Municipal Police Officers’ Association as
the current rate of dues, or an amount as may hereafter be established by the El
Paso Municipal Police Officers’ Association as dues; and remit the same to the El
Paso Municipal Police Officers’ Association. This authorization shall also constitute
my approval for the City to deduct and remit to the Association a single special
assessment of up to $5.00 during any contract year, upon notification by the
Association to the City that such amount is being uniformly assessed to all
members of the Association. This authorization shall be effective until revoked by
written notification to the City Comptroller’s Office.

The amount to be deducted shall be filled in by the employee authorizing
the deduction.

Section 5. The Association will defend, save, hold harmless and
indemnify the City from any and all claims, demands, suits or any other form of
liability which may arise out of the execution, placing into effect or carrying out
the terms of Sections 3 and 4 of this Article.

Section 6. The City shall provide to the Association monthly a list and
amount of dues deductions from members of the Association.

Section 7. The City shall not engage in the following practices:

(a) Interfere with, restrain or coerce employees in the exercise
of rights granted in this Agreement;

(b) Dominate, interfere with, assist in the formation, existence
or administration of, or contribute financial support to, any
other employee organization which claims or seeks to
represent employees within the bargaining unit referred to in
Article 1, Section 1 hereof;

  

> C1003

428397 47
(¢)

Section 8.

(a)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Section 9.

Encourage or discourage membership in any labor
organization which claims or seeks to represent employees
covered by this Agreement by discrimination in hiring,
tenure, training or other terms or conditions of employment;
or Discharge or discriminate against any employee because
the employee has filed any affidavit, petition, grievance or
complaint of this Agreement or because the employee has or
has not formed, joined, or chosen to be represented by, any
labor organization.

The Association shall not engage in the following practices:

Interfere with, restrain or coerce employees in the exercise
of the rights granted in this Agreement;

Restrain or coerce the City in the selection of its
representatives for the purposes of collective bargaining or
the adjustment of grievances;

Cause or attempt to cause the City to discriminate against
any employee in hiring, tenure, training or other terms or
conditions of employment because of the employees
membership or lack of membership in any labor
organization;

Cause or attempt to cause the City to discharge or
discriminate against any employee because the employee
has given information or testimony alleging a violation of this
Agreement, any law of the United States or the State of
Texas, the City Charter, the Rules and Regulations of the
Civil Service Commission or the Rules and Regulations of the
Police Department; or

To cause or attempt to cause the City to pay or deliver or
agree to pay or deliver any money or other things of value,
in the nature of an exaction, for services which are not
performed or not to be performed.

Neither the City nor the Association shall discriminate

against any employee because of sex, creed, race or national origin, except
where any of the foregoing is a bona fide occupational qualification. Neither the
City nor the Association shall discriminate against any employee in the

428397

 

48
application or interpretation of the provisions of this Agreement on the basis of
the employee's Association membership or non-membership. The City and the
Association shall each comply with applicable provisions of the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act.

ARTICLE 24
EXISTING CONDITIONS

Section 1. Except to the extent modified by this Agreement, any direct
or indirect economic benefits set forth in applicable provisions of state law, the
City Charter, City Ordinance No. 8064, the Rules and Regulations of the Civil
Service Commission and the Rules and Regulations of the El Paso Police
Department as of the date of signing of this Agreement, shall not be changed for
the duration of this Agreement, except pursuant to the procedure established in
Article 33, Section 2.

Section 2. | Except to the extent modified by this Agreement, physical
items used by employees shall continue to be furnished as they have been in the
past; that is, those types of items which have been furnished by the City shall
continue to be furnished by the City and those types of items which have been
furnished by employees shall continue to be furnished by employees. The
question of what types of items have been furnished by the City shall be resolved
by reference to City purchase orders for the past three years. The parties agree
that this provision shall not be interpreted so as to preclude resort to improved
technology.

Section 3. Prior to changing any working condition other than direct or
indirect economic benefits set forth in the sources listed in Section 1 of this
Article, the City shall notify the Association of any such contemplated change.
The Association shall be invited to present its views with regard to the proposed
change to the Chief or other responsible City official to be designated in the
Notification. The final decision with regard to the scope of any such change shall
remain with the City.

Section 4. Any changes in wages, hours, terms and conditions of
employment and other benefits granted by the Texas State Legislature requiring
the City to compensate, remunerate or otherwise assist employees after the
effective date of this Agreement shall not alter the terms of this Agreement
during the life of said Agreement. This provision shall not unfavorably affect
employees as to any changes in wages, hours, terms and conditions of
employment and other benefits granted by the Texas State Legislature requiring
the State of Texas to compensate, remunerate or otherwise assist employees

 

bas ws €1003

428397 49
after the effective date of this Agreement. Any changes in wages, hours, terms
and conditions of employment and other benefits granted by the Texas State
Legislature requiring the State of Texas to compensate, remunerate or otherwise
assist employees shall not be incorporated into this Agreement; nor shall the City
be required at any time to pay any share of said wages, hours, terms and
conditions of employment and other benefits. Any reduction or elimination of
wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment, and other benefits by the
Texas Legislature that previously required the City to compensate, remunerate or
otherwise assist employees after the effective date of this Agreement shall not
alter the terms of this Agreement during the life of said Agreement.

It continues to be the intent of the provisions of this Section, as well as
other Sections and Articles herein contained, that this collective bargaining
Agreement takes precedence over state law and that this Agreement alone
controls the wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment of the
employees covered by Article 1, Section 1 of this Agreement, all in accordance
with the provisions of Section 174.005 of the Texas Local Government Code.

Section5. The City shall, during negotiations, provide to the
Association a current copy of City Ordinance No. 8064, the City Charter, and the
Civil Service Commission Rules. During the term of this Contract the City shall
also provide the Association all changes, supplements and amendments to the
aforementioned documents which pertain to the El Paso Police Department as
such are approved.

Section 6. Past practices currently in effect and not specifically covered
in this Agreement will be continued.

ARTICLE 25
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 1. Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be deemed to
create a vested property right in any position of employment covered thereby.
However, non-probationary Officers do have a property interest in their
employment by virtue of the Civil Service provisions of the City Charter and the
Civil Service Rules adopted pursuant thereto.

Section 2. No less than fifty parking spaces in the downtown police
garage will be assigned for the use of the officers for their personal vehicles for
downtown usage.

 

428397 , 50
Section 3. Commissioned employees completing Police Academy
Training after October 1, 1992, shall have completed a minimum of 45 accredited
(pursuant to the definitions contained in section 211.1 of the regulations of the
Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education) college
hours within three years. If the 45 hour minimum is not met by then, the Chief
of Police shall have the authority to either grant a leave without pay for up to
one year or reduce the employee one pay level for a period of one year, but not
both. If the 45 hour minimum is not satisfied by that time, the employee shall be
terminated. If exigent circumstances exist, the Chief of Police may at his
discretion grant an employee an extension of time to complete the educational
requirements.

Section 4. The City agrees to pay directly the liability insurance
required by employees for driving City owned vehicles while on duty. The City
may do so by a bid for all such vehicles.

Section 5. As used in this Agreement, the masculine and feminine
genders shall be deemed to include the other, unless the context plainly requires
otherwise.

Section 6. The parties recognize their mutual responsibility to deliver to
the citizens of El Paso the highest degree of contemporary police service
achievable within the financial resources reasonably available. To this desired
end we are compelled to make a concerted effort. It is in this community's
paramount interest that the projected direction along which public safety in El
Paso must proceed be established.

Section 7. The Civil Service provisions of the City Charter adopted
January 24, 1984, as amended, the Civil Service Rules adopted pursuant thereto,
as amended, and City Ordinance No. 8064, as amended, and departmental
policies effected thereunder, in effect at the time of this Agreement takes effect
shall in all respects remain in effect during the term of the agreement, except as
specifically amended in this Agreement.

Section 8. The Chief of Police and the Association shall meet and
discuss the possibility of developing a Reserve Police Officer Program, using part-
time officers, retired officers, and creating job sharing and flex-time scheduling.
Any agreement of the parties shall be adopted as a Pilot Program through a
Memorandum of Understanding ratified by the Association and City.

 

428397 , 51
Section 9. Civil Service Rule 8, Section 1.1, relating to political activity,
does not apply to Officers covered by this Agreement. Officers, while on duty,
cannot engage in political activity in a manner that would violate State law.

Section 10. The Parties have agreed to form a Labor Management
Committee that will explore optimum disciplinary models that will facilitate and
encourage Officers' acceptance of responsibility, training and education of
discipline. The Parties agree to form the Labor Management Committee within
one-hundred eighty (180) days of the signing of this Agreement. The Committee
will conclude its study and recommendations of one (1) of signing this
Agreement. The recommendations of the Committee will be advisory only and
the Chief will retain the discretion to accept, reject or adopt any of the
recommendations of the Committee.

ARTICLE 26
WORKING OFF SUSPENDED TIME

Officers suspended up to a maximum of ten (10) working days may, upon
the Officer’s request and at the Chief's discretion, forfeit vacation, personal
leave, or compensatory time off designated by the Chief for a period equal to the
suspension. Approval of forfeited vacation, personal leave, or compensatory time
off by the Chief shall not be unreasonably withheld. The provisions of this
Section shall apply solely to suspensions which are agreed to by the Officer and
no appeal to the Commission or to arbitration may be instituted on suspensions
where the officer has agreed to the suspended time.

ARTICLE 27
PERSONNEL RECORDS

The parties agree to follow Section 143.089 of the Texas Local
Government Code (herein referred to as “the Act”) as modified by this Section.
The "Director" as used in the Act shall be the Personnel Director. The
“Commission” as used in (c) of the Act shall include an arbitrator selected in
accordance with this Agreement. The "Permanent Personnel File” referred to in
the Act will include all file folders on an Officer maintained by the City outside
the Police Department, whereas the "Department File" referred to in paragraph
(g) of the Act shall consist of all file folders on the officer maintained in the
Police Department. The contents of the "Permanent Personnel Files” will be
limited to materials presently maintained by the City outside the Police
Department as modified by the Act. All present files will be checked to see if they
conform to the requirements of this Section. A copy of the Act is attached
hereto as Appendix “E.” The parties agree that any conflict between this

 

428397 52
provision and the Texas Public Information Act shall be resolved by complying
with the latter Act.

ARTICLE 28
ASSIGNMENTS

Section 1. Officers assigned to work the Sun Carnival Parade, events at
Southwest University Park, and special events shall be assigned on a voluntary
basis first. “Special events” is a parade, demonstration or public assembly as
defined by El Paso City Code 13.36.010. The Chief will make the final
determination if an event qualifies as a “special event.” The Chief’s determination
is final unless it is arbitrary or capricious. The Association may request that the
City Council budget adequate overtime for the event. The City will attempt to
staff the Sun Carnival Parade, events at Southwest University Park, and similar
special events from the voluntary overtime list prior to altering the schedules of
Officers to cover such events.

Any Officer Department-wide may volunteer and will be offered an opportunity to
work these events. In the event that the City cannot fill assignments on a
voluntary basis, then the City may make said assignments on a mandatory basis.
Employees assigned to work the Sun Carnival Parade, events at the Southwest
University Park and similar special events shall have consecutive days off.
However, at the request of the Officer, subject to the discretion and approval of
the Department, the Officer may be granted split days off. This provision shall
control irrespective of any past practice.

Section 2. The transfer policy during the term of this Agreement is as reflected in
Appendix “G” attached hereto. Seniority shall be considered in the determination
of all lateral transfers and job assignments. Any Officer who is interested in a
particular job shall have the right, in the event of a permanent vacancy, to be
considered for said job, provided he has first signified his interest in said job by
completion of the form hereinafter set forth as Appendix “D” and filed same with
the Chief or the Chief's designee.

Section 3. During the terms of this Agreement an equal number of
representatives of the City and the Association shall meet diligently to study and
if possible make recommendations as to the manner in which job assignments
are awarded. Either the City representative or the Association representatives
may call for any meeting.

 

vat ny C1003

428397 : 53
Section 4. Regular season baseball games scheduled at Southwest University
Park during calendar year 2014 are excluded from the operation of Section 1 of
this Article.

Section 5. For the duration of this Agreement, a voluntary overtime list shall be
maintained with a procedure to be established by the Chief with input from the
Association. The Chief shall retain the right to call in Officers irrespective of an
Officer's rank, assignment or placement on the voluntary overtime list based on
departmental needs.

Section 6. The voluntary overtime list shall consist of a call list where an Officer
volunteers his service to be paid at one and one-half (1 1/2) times the Officer's
regular rate.

Section 7. In consideration for volunteering for the overtime list, Officers on the
voluntary overtime list will be given first priority in placement to straight time
assignments within the department. Officers on the voluntary overtime list will be
called on a rotating basis for overtime opportunities as departmental needs arise.

Section 8. Any Officer called to work from the Voluntary overtime list that reports
to work, shall be paid for any time worked at the voluntary overtime rate of pay.

Section 9. The voluntary overtime call list shall never be used in lieu of existing
staffing.

ARTICLE 29
SEPARABILITY

Should any provision of this Agreement be rendered or declared invalid by
reason of any applicable existing or subsequently enacted legislation or
regulation or by reason of the decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidation of part or parts of this Agreement shall not invalidate the remaining
Portions thereof, and said remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect
for the duration of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 30
INTERNAL AFFAIRS INVESTIGATIONS

Section 1. To insure that internal investigations are conducted in a
manner conducive to good order and discipline, while observing and protecting
the individual rights of each officer on the force, interviews conducted by the

 

428397 54
Internal Affairs Division shall be conducted in accordance with the following

rules:

428397

(a)

(b)

©

(d)

The interview of any officer shall be at a reasonable hour,
preferably when the officer is on duty or during the daylight hours,
unless the exigencies of the investigation dictate otherwise.

The interview shall take place at a location designated by the
investigating officer, usually the Internal Affairs Division office.

The officer shall be informed of the rank and name of the officer in
charge of the investigation, as well as the rank and name of the
interviewing officer and the identity of all persons present during
the interview. If an officer is directed to leave the officer's post and
report for an interview to another command, the officer's command
shall be promptly notified of the officer's whereabouts.

Except in exigent circumstances, an officer involved in an officer-
involved shooting, critical incident, and/or custody death shall be
informed forty-eight (48) hours prior to being interviewed or asked
to otherwise respond to an internal affairs investigation of the
general nature of the investigation before any interview
commences. “Exigent circumstances” include necessary cooperation
during incident scene procedures, including securing the scene,
controlling the public, obtaining witness information, obtaining and
processing all physical evidence from the scene or from the officer.
During the first forty-eight (48) hours, the parties also agree that
an officer shall not be compelled to participate in a “walk-through”
investigation without their legal counsel being present. The
administration of a post-accident drug test is not defined as a
"walk-though" investigation and therefore may be administered
immediately following a shooting, critical incident and/or in custody
death. The parties agree that a “walk-through” is defined as an
investigative tool where El Paso Police Department investigators
and/or supervisors request the officer to re-trace their actions in an
officer-involved shooting, critical incident, and/or in custody death
while being questioned concerning their observations and actions in
the incident. Such “walk through” shall not be videoed taped.
Sufficient information reasonably to apprise the officer of the
allegations shall be provided. If it is known that the officer is being
interviewed as a witness only, the officer shall be so informed. If an
officer is ordered to write a statement, the City shall provide a form

 

bt C1008
428397

(e)

(f

(9)

(h)

(i)

G)

(k)

with the Garrity Warning printed on it as set forth Appendix I.
Nothing herein shall prevent an officer from writing into his or her
statement any protections afforded by state and federal law.

The interview shall be completed with reasonable dispatch. Time
shall be provided also for personal necessities, meals, telephone
calls and rest periods as are reasonably necessary.

The officer shall not be subjected to any offensive language, nor
shall the officer be threatened with transfer, dismissal or other
disciplinary punishment. No promise of reward shall be made as an
inducement to answering questions. Nothing in this Section is to be
construed so as to prohibit the investigating officer from informing
the officer that the officer's conduct can become the subject of
disciplinary action resulting in disciplinary punishment.

If an officer is under arrest or likely to be (that is, if the officer is a
suspect or a target of a criminal investigation), the officer shall be
given his/her rights pursuant to the existing law.

Upon request, the officer shall be given an exact copy of any
written statement the officer may execute.

The refusal by an officer to answer, pursuant to a direct order,
pertinent questions concerning any non-criminal matter may result
in disciplinary actions.

The City shall make an audio recording of the interview. The
recording shall commence immediately at the beginning of the
interview. There shall be no “off the record” questions. All recesses
called during the questioning shall be noted in the record.

If, during any investigation covered thereby, the Internal Affairs
Division fails substantially to comply with the provisions of this
Section, no statement which the officer may have given during
such interview may be introduced or alluded to by the City in a
disciplinary appeal hearing. In the case of a dispute as to whether
the Internal Affairs Division has substantially complied with this
Section, the issue may be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the
provisions of Article 21 prior to an appeal hearing before the Civil
Service Commission. The sole question before the arbitrator shall
be whether the Internal Affairs Division has substantially complied

 

56
with this Section , and, if the arbitrator finds that the Division has
not substantially complied therewith, the sole remedy shall be that,
in an appeal hearing, the City may not introduce or allude to any
statements the officer may have given during such interview.

(1) The Officer's written statement shall be the official statement to
Internal Affairs. The audio recording can be used to clarify alleged
conflicts of interpretation of ambiguities in the written statement.

(m) An officer who goes before a Disciplinary Board shall be advised in
writing, of his rights pursuant to Garrity v. New Jersey. Such officer
may, upon the officer's request, have present throughout the
proceedings any uninvolved member of the unit designated by the
Association President to attend as a silent observer, but the
Association member shall not be present during the decision
making process of the Board.

(n) The officer shall be allowed to consult the officer's attorney at any
time during the investigatory process so long as such consultation
does not impede the investigatory process. At the request of an
officer other than a witness officer, a member of the Association’s
Board may be present during the process as a witness, provided
that the member is able to, and does, arrive within two hours of
the time he is first called to attend. The Association Board member
shall attend only as a witness and shall not speak during, or
interfere with, the interview. If the Association Board member
would otherwise be on duty during the interview, his time shall be
charged to Leave for Association Business.

Section 2. Disciplinary action in non-criminal matters must be taken
against an officer within one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days following
the occurrence of the incident. Disciplinary action in criminal related matters
must be taken against an officer within two (2) years of occurrence of the
incident or within sixty (60) calendar days of discovery of the incident, whichever
is later. The Police Chief and Association may by agreement extend these time
periods.

(b) For purposes of this section, if the employee is off duty for any reason
during the last five calendar days of any time limit specified in this section, the
Association will accept service of any disciplinary notice. If the disciplinary notice
is served on the Association, on behalf of an officer who serving on active duty

 

21003,

428397 , 57

 
with the United States Armed Services or on an authorized extended leave of
absence, an appeal of the disciplinary action by the officer is automatic.

(c) The time frames set forth in Section 2 of this Article shall apply to all
actual or potential disciplinary impositions regarding employees covered by this
Agreement, notwithstanding any Civil Service Rule which might otherwise be
tead to impose a shorter time limit on the City or the Chief.

Section 3.

A. The Chief, and only the Chief, may order or request a polygraph
examination. Polygraph examinations shall be employed only after:

1. The Chief has carefully reviewed the entire case;
2. All investigative leads have been exhausted;

3. The complainant is first examined by a licensed polygraph examiner
and passes such examination; and

4. The EPMPOA President, or designated representative, has been
briefed on the facts of the case and the reasons for ordering the
polygraph examination. The EPMPOA President will be provided
access to review the entire case with reasonable review time. The
EPMPOA will be given reasonable time to suggest (on the record)
any investigative leads that need to be followed.

A copy of the polygraph examination shall be provided to the accused
officer immediately following the examination. A copy of the independent
evaluator’s report shall be provided to the accused officer immediately upon
receipt with the Department. When the polygraph examination is used, the
accused officer and EPMPOA will be advised 24 hours in advance, in writing, prior
to the administration of the polygraph test.

A police officer subjected to a polygraph examination may request a
licensed examiner who an independent contractor from outside the department.
An officer is not required to sign a waiver of his or her Constitutional rights or a
waiver of his or her right to seek redress of grievances through state or federal
courts.

B. If a police officer is subjected to a polygraph examination, the
licensed examiner who administers the examination shall not know (1) the

 

428397 38
results of the complainant's polygraph examination; or (2) the name of the
licensed examiner who conducted such examination. Notwithstanding, the
provisions of this Paragraph or Article 24 (Existing Conditions), any applicable
prohibitions in future statutes concerning the use of the polygraph examinations
shall be followed as of the date the law becomes applicable to the unit covered
by this Contract.

C. Polygraphs under this Article are administrative in nature and shall
be conducted in accordance with the Internal Affairs provisions outlined in this
Agreement, and all administrative rights provided to an officer under this
Agreement shall apply.

Section 4, All polygraph examinations shall be in compliance with existing
state law.

ARTICLE 31
STRESS MANAGEMENT

Both the City and the Association believe that it is to be their mutual
benefit for law enforcement personnel covered by this Agreement to have
available to them a stress management program. To this end a program will be
initiated. The program shall satisfy and conform to the following criteria:

(1) The program shall have the elements of both continuity and
individuality of counseling. To that end, the City, after consultation
with the Association would, on an independent contract basis,
engage the service of an expert in stress management whose office
will be located in the City of El Paso.

The expert's duties will be to devise, implement and operate an El Paso Police
Department counseling program covering the identification and treatment of
stress.

(2) There shall be four methods of entry into the program:

(a) Behavioral cause investigation;
(b) Supervisory referral;

(c) Voluntary participation;

(d) Post trauma referral.

The behavioral cause investigation is an after the fact referral made when
the Police Chief orders a behavioral cause investigation be made of an Officer

 

428397 ‘ 59
who has been the subject of an internal affairs investigation immediately prior
thereto.

The supervisory referral results when a supervisor detects behavioral
patterns which indicate that the Officer requires the intervention of the program.
The supervisor can recommend that the supervisor's subordinate be required by
the Chief to go to the expert, or the expert's agent, for evaluation and
recommendation and such treatment as may be deemed necessary by the
expert. To this end, supervisory personnel shall be trained in the recognition of
stress.

The voluntary participation method involves any officer who after
evaluation, the expert determines needs to be in the program.

Post trauma referral occurs when an Officer, in the performance of his
duties, has been involved in the shooting of another individual or has been
exposed to any incident including, but not limited to, situations where another
may have suffered injury or death, wherein the immediate supervisor of the
Officer involved is of the opinion that such referral is in the best interests of the
Department or the Officer.

In the cases where an Officer, in the performance of duties has been
involved in a shooting, the expert and another person of the Officer's choice will
be immediately notified and allowed immediate access to the Officer involved.

(3) All conversations between the Officer and the expert employed in
connection with the program and records maintained by the program shall be
considered privileged as to the Officer. When the expert has concluded that the
Officer constitutes a clear danger to himself/herself or others, the expert shall
immediately notify the Chief of said danger. In cases where an Officer is referred
to the program by order of the Police Chief, the expert shall report to the Chief
only compliance or noncompliance with the order to submit to evaluation and/or
compliance or noncompliance with treatment of the expert. The expert shall
also, at the appropriate time, report to the Chief that no further participation by
the Officer is required.

(4) The stress management program should be designed so as to
include physical as well as mental well-being.

(5) This program shall be designed to provide assistance to the Officer
in order to manage problems of stress affecting the ability of the Officer to
effectively perform the duties of a police officer. If in order to handle problems of

 

428397 : 60
stress peculiar to the officer it becomes necessary, in the sole opinion of the
expert, to include significant other persons in order to properly handle the
Officer's counseling, then same may be done. It is not the intent of this program
to engage in counseling services in areas other than that which directly affect the
Officer.

(6) All costs involved in the evaluation and treatment of any Officer in
this program shall be paid by the City.

(7) This program shall not be construed as preventing the Chief from
requiring independent evaluation of an officer by an appropriate expert on the
Chief's choice.

ARTICLE 32
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING

The City and the Association agree that police officers may be called upon
in hazardous situations without warning, and that it is imperative to the interest
of police officers and the public to ensure that police officers are not substance
impaired. In order to further their joint interest in protecting police officers and
the public, the City and the Association agree to mandatory random drug testing
described in this section. Forty percent (40%) of police officers of all ranks,
including the Chief of Police, shall be subject to mandatory random drug tested
during each calendar year on a fair and impartial statistical basis as provided in
the Police Department's Drug and Alcohol Policy. The fair and impartial statistical
basis (in which each police officer has an equal chance of being selected) shall
be by a non-discriminatory computerized program operated and certified as non-
discriminatory by an independent firm hired by the City, and the employee shall
be tested upon being selected by the computer. The City shall notify the officer
as to whether the test was post-accident, random or based upon reasonable
suspicion.

For the purposes of this section:

A. “drug testing” shall be defined as the compulsory production and
submission of urine or blood by an officer for chemical analysis to detect
the presence of prohibited drug usage.

B. “random drug testing” shall mean drug testing of individuals selected by
the method described in the prior paragraph.

 

428397 61
C. “reasonable suspicion” shall be defined as a judgment/conclusion that a
person is unable to safely and/or effectively perform their duties due to
the suspected influence of drugs, alcohol, or inhalants. Reasonable
suspicion is based on specific, observable facts that an officer may be
under the influence of drugs, alcohol, or inhalants. Reasonable suspicion
testing is not limited by this article, except to the extent that any urine
testing utilized shall be in accordance with the lab testing protocol below.
Reasonable suspicion testing may involve urine or blood as determined
under existing legal standards. An Officer may, but will not be required to,
take more than one of the same tests.

D. “SAMHSA/CAP FUDT” means Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service
Administration, College of American Pathologists and Forensic Urine Drug
Testing.

An employee’s mandatory random drug test results and related collection and
diagnostic information shall be disclosed to the City to administer and enforce
the Police Department’s Alcohol and Drug Policy and this Collective Bargaining
Agreement to include the administration of disciplinary action. The City and the
Association otherwise regard an employee’s mandatory random drug test results
and related collection and diagnostic information as confidential as allowed by
law unless a determination otherwise is made by the Attorney General or a
Court. The City may use test results in a disciplinary hearing, but shall initially file
that evidence under seal, and it shall not become public until a ruling has been
made in its admissibility in the proceeding.

The City and the Association have a mutual interest in ensuring that drug
impaired employees do not perform law enforcement duties. The City and the
Association agree that the purpose of the mandatory random drug testing is not
to punish an employee who has not violated the Police Department's Drug and
Alcohol Policy. The City and the Association are committed to the principal that
the mandatory random drug testing for employees is designed and will be
administered to result in disciplinary action only against those officers who have
violated the Police Department Drug and Alcohol Policy.

The City has developed a Police Department Drug and Alcohol Policy with
procedures and protocols, which follow the requirements of SAMHSA/CAP FUDT.
The Police Department Drug and Alcohol Policy currently in effect will remain
unchanged during the life of the Agreement, except as modified herein, or if
changes are necessary to comply with developments in the law or modifications
of the Medical Review Officer Manual. The parties agree that the current police
department policy attached as Appendix F, is consistent with this Article, and

 

428397 62
contains additional procedural and substantive requirements, and further agree
that the City is entitled to continue the implementation of drug

The section of the Police Department Drug and Alcohol Policy dealing with
mandatory drug testing and the consequences thereof is subject to amendment
by the City only as the City determines is necessary to follow the requirements of
SAMSHA/CAP FUDT. The City shall require and laboratory selected for collecting
samples to conduct a background investigation on those laboratory personnel
involved in collecting or handling an unsealed sample. In addition, the City shall
require any laboratory selected for collecting samples to allow only employees
who have not been arrested by members of the El Paso Police Department or
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor crime involving dishonest conduct or
possession of illegal drugs to be involved in the collecting or handling of an
unsealed sample collected from an El Paso Police Officer.

The Association may file a grievance regarding the application, interpretation or
enforcement of the language in this section, subject to mandatory arbitration if
not resolved. A complaint of non-compliance which is related to an individual
disciplinary matter shall be heard by the arbitrator or a hearing examiner, as
elected by the subject officer.

The sample for testing shall be a split sample. The collector shall inform the
officer of the size of the required sample, and shall use a chain of custody
process to split, label and send the sample, which shall be forwarded for testing
within twenty-four (24) hours of the sample being taken. When an officer
appears unwilling or unable to give a urine specimen at the time of the test,
laboratory staff will document the circumstances surrounding the inability or
unwillingness. The officer will be permitted no more than four (4) hours to
provide the sample during which time he will remain in the testing area under
observation. Reasonable amounts of fluid may be given to the officer to
encourage urination. Failure to provide a sample may be considered a refusal to
submit to a drug test. Test results shall be inadmissible in any administrative
disciplinary hearing if it is determined that the laboratory collecting samples has
failed to conduct a background investigation on the laboratory personnel
involved in collecting or handling the unsealed sample which resulted in a
positive test result. The burden of showing that a background investigation was
not conducted shall be on the party seeking to have the test results excluded
from the administrative hearing.

The City shall use only a SAMHSA/CAP FUDT certified laboratory for mandatory
drug testing and shall require that such laboratory comply with the requirements
of SAMHSA/CAP FUDT. The results of the test or tests shall be sent by the

 

428397 : , , 63
laboratory to the Medical Review Officer (“MRO”) in accordance with the lab
protocol or the MRO Handbook. The MRO may act separately on test results for
each of the split samples from each lab. The specimens collected for testing shall
be maintained in a secured area until picked up by the courier or otherwise
forwarded for testing. The City shall use only a Medical Review Officer (MRO) for
the City of El Paso who is a licensed physician and who is certified as a Medical
Review Officer by the American Association of Medical Review Officers.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to abolish the existing authority
and practice of the City to conduct drug tests for:

Pre-employment

Pre-assignment for Narcotics

Reasonable suspicion.

On return to duty after an absence of 30-calendar days or more.
Post - accident

Post - firearm discharge

DAPWN rE

Such test will be conducted under the same laboratory processes and
protocols as mandatory random testing, except that laboratory protocols and
provisions of the MRO handbook applicable to blood and other samples shall be
followed where indicated.

ARTICLE 33
COMPLETE AGREEMENT

Section 1. The parties acknowledge that, during the negotiations which
resulted in this Agreement, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make
demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter not removed by
law from the area of collective bargaining regarding the employees covered by
this Agreement and that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the
parties hereto after the expiration of that right and opportunity are fully set forth
in this Agreement. Therefore, the City and the Association, for the life of this
Agreement, each voluntarily and unqualifiedly waives its rights, and each agrees
that the other shall not be obligated, to bargain collectively with respect to any
subject or matter not specifically referred to or covered by this Agreement, even
though the subject may or may not have been within the knowledge or
contemplation of either or both of the parties at the time they negotiated or
signed this Agreement.

 

428397 64
Section 2. The parties further agree that any mutual agreement or
understandings which are reached during the term of this Agreement shall be
reduced to writing.

ARTICLE 34
DURATION

This Agreement shall be in effect from the date of execution through
September 1, 2014 through August 31, 2018, this Agreement shall be
automatically renewed from year to year, thereafter, unless either party shall
give notice in writing to the other of its intention to terminate or modify this
Agreement at least 120 days before the expiration thereof. If either party has
given such notice to modify this Agreement, but no new Agreement has been
reached, this Agreement shall remain in effect until the earlier of the following
dates: August 31, 2019, or the date a successor agreement becomes effective.

If, in the negotiations of a successor Agreement, the parties reach
"impasse" as that term is defined in Texas Local Gov't Code Chapter 174, either
may utilize the Impasse Procedures set forth in Appendix "C" to this Agreement
in an attempt to resolve the impasse.

ARTICLE 35
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

Section 1. | Outside employment opportunities for Officers will be governed by
the City's Outside Employment Policy dated January 17, 2012. A copy of the
City's Outside Employment Policy dated January 17, 2012 is appended to this
Agreement as Appendix L.

Section 2. Neither the City nor the Department will require private employers
seeking to hire Officers for outside employment to go through a City-created
hiring office to facilitate such outside employment opportunities as long as its
use is not mandated.

DATED this day of , 2014.

 

428397 , 65
EL PASO MUNICIPAL POLICE CITY OF EL PASO
OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION

 

By: By: Que bo
PRESIDE! CITY MANAGER
Ron Marti Tomas Gonzalez

APPROVED AS TO CONTENT:

    

Assistant City Attorney
For the City of El Paso

  

428397

©1003
APPENDIX “A”
City of El Paso
Police Department Wage Formula

Section 1. The parties hereto agree that a “market approach” shall be
used to determine wage levels for members of the bargaining unit. In
implementing this approach, the parties agree to compare wage rates with Police
Officers and Supervisors in “competitive” regional cities in Texas, Arizona and
New Mexico. The cities to be used to determine the market shall be
Albuquerque, Austin, Dallas, Houston, San Antonio, Phoenix and Tucson. The
parties agree, that pursuant to the following methodology, the City shall raise
Police Officers pay to the “mean” of the pay in the seven competitive regional
cities. “Mean” shall be defined as a value that is computed by dividing the sum of
a set of terms by the number of terms to achieve the average value of a set of
numbers.

In conjunction with this market approach, the parties will use the entry
level annual salary in relation to the classifications involving Police Officers and
Detectives.

The ranks of Police Sergeant, Lieutenant and Commander are compared
at the minimum and maximum levels in the competitive cities. Police Deputy
Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs are not matched with the other cities but rather will
retain the same percentage relationship to the Police Commander maximum level
as existed in the previous Agreement. For purposes of comparison, the method
of the average of the cities excluding El Paso will be used.

Base pay figures as shown on each city’s official pay schedule as of
February 1, for each fiscal year will be used. Base pay figures actually paid as of
February 1 for each fiscal year will be used. As used herein, the “base pay figures”
will be the actual starting pay being paid to the most recent officers hired into
entry-level positions, regardless of the manner or means of their hiring process. In
determining starting pay it is assumed the pay starts at the minimum pay level for
probationary officers as shown on each city’s pay scale. When a question arises as
to which job classification or pay step is used by a city for probationary officers, the
parties may provide evidence to establish what is the true entry-level pay rate. This
evidence may include, but is not limited to, the city’s official pay scale and/or pay
ordinance, the collective bargaining agreement, the most recent job
announcements, the city’s website, and entry-level officer pay stubs. Experienced
officers and reserve officers, including reinstatements or rehires, hired into
Positions above entry-level pay are not counted. Officers who graduate from an

 

ban C1003

428397 67
academy and take probationary positions are counted, even if they start at a Step
above Step 1.

Base pay figures will be adjusted for geographic differential by using
current data from Economic Research Institute (ERI) and calculating a
geographical index pursuant to the formulas demonstrated by the City in the
presentation dated January 25, 2002, which is attached as Appendix H. A
member of the Association and the City’s management team will review the
calculation of the base pay and geographical differentials and provide said
figures to the Office of Management and Budget no later than February 15, of
each year. The calculation of base pay shall consider all contractual increases in
pay for the other cities that are received prior to July 25 of each year.

Section 2. _ The City shall pay the agreed.upon wage formula effective
September 1 of each fiscal year of the Agreement after November 16, 2014.

The parties agree to place a maximum cap on the percentage increase
that the City will have to pay in any particular fiscal year to no greater than four
percent (4.0%). However, any increase more than 3% may be divided and paid
half on September 1, and half on June 1, of the affected year.

Under no circumstances will the pay of police officers be reduced as a
result of this formula.

Section 3. _ Both parties recognize that the intent of the wage package is
to attempt to place El Paso Police Officers in the middle of the range of Police
Officers employed in comparable cities in the Southwest by utilizing the “Market
Approach.” Both parties also recognize that there are factors that could impact
the City’s ability to do so beyond the term of this contract. Therefore, the parties
agree to collectively bargain in good faith during the last year of this contract to
determine whether the goal of paying the officers at the middle range is still
achievable within the City’s financial plan.

If the parties have not reached a new Agreement for FY 2019 (September
1, 2018 — August 31, 2019) by August 31, 2018, the agreement shall be
extended an additional year to August 31, 2019 based on the wage formula,
unless the City Manager gives the Association written notice on or before July 31,
2018 that the City Manager has determined that wages cannot be increased
based on the wage formula, such determination to be at the sole discretion of
the City Manager. If the City Manager gives such notice, both parties shall
continue to negotiate toward a new Agreement for FY 2019. If the parties have
failed to reach a new agreement by January 1, 2019 the City shall pay an

 

nv 1003

428397 ™ , 68
advance of one percent (1%) effective January 1, 2019. The one percent (1%)
will be applied against any future agreed upon wage increase, if any, whether
based upon the wage formula or any negotiated wage increase for FY 2019.

Section 4. Effective the first full pay period after January 1, 2009, a new
step will be added for Senior Police Officers/Detectives with 20 years or more of
service at 3% differential above (P3 Level 5).

Effective first full pay period after January 1, 2011, a new step will be
added for Senior Police Officers/Detectives with 15 years but less than 20 years
of service at 3% differential above (P3 Level 5).

Effective first full pay period after January 1, 2011, the step added on
January 1, 2009 for Senior Police/Detectives with 20 years or more service will
be adjusted to be at a 3% differential above the step for Senior Police
Officers/Detectives with 15 years or more of service.

Section 5. Effective the first full pay period after September 1, 2015, new
pay steps will be added as follows:

A. Anew pay level for Year 13 and Year 14 officers. This pay level is calculated by
adding 1.5% to the current P3 Level 5 (or twelve year officer) and rounding to the
nearest cent. Officers with 13 and 14 years of service as determined by the
Police Department HR staff will move into this new level on their anniversary date
in accordance with normal step progression as defined in this agreement. The
original 15 year officer step, currently P3-6 is retained although it is renumbered
as P3-7 in accordance with Appendix A.

B. Two new pay levels will be calculated by adding 1% to the current P3-6 (15 year
officer) for the first new level. This level is for the year 17 officer, the step to be
numbered as P3-8. An additional 1 percent is added to the new P3-8 to create
level P3-9 for Year 18 and Year 19 officers. The actual 20 year officer level
remains the same without calculation although it is renumbered as Level Ten in
accordance with Appendix A. Both new step calculations are rounded to the
nearest cent at the biweekly pay rate.

C. Anew 2% level is added to grade P3 resulting in P3-11. P3-11 is the new level
is for the 21 year officer and is calculated above the 20 year pay level to the
nearest cent.

D. The new 2% pay levels for grades P4, P5, and P6 are added to each grade
respectively and are at Level 8. The new level will be exactly 2% higher than the
current survey maximum amount on the pay schedules. When the annual

 

428397 . 69
formula causes an increase in the survey maximum the new step is increased to
stay 2% above the survey maximum rounded to the nearest cent.

Section 4. Time Table for Base Wage Determinations; Resolution of
Disputes.

(a) The City will make an initial determination concerning the raise
mandated by application of the ERI methodology, and will share its
determination and underlying data with the Association by February 15 of each
year, commencing February 15, 2015. The Association will provide the City with
any disagreements with the City’s calculations no later than the last day of
February each year.

(b) If the parties fail to agree on a determination under the formula by
March 7, both parties shall prepare and file a position paper or brief with an
agreed neutral referee by March 21. In the event the parties are unable to agree
on a neutral referee, each shall submit the names of three referees on separate
slips. One will be drawn and discarded. The parties will then alternate drawing
and the one remaining referee will serve. The selected referee shall make a
decision within ten days, and shall have the right to conduct a telephone
hearing, at his/her discretion, prior to ruling. The amounts determined by the
teferee shall be used in the budget and paid for the subsequent fiscal year.

(c) The Association retains the right to file a grievance and seek
arbitration on the correct pay formula amount. Any back pay award made by an
arbitrator shall not be payable until the following fiscal year of the city. The
decision of the arbitrator will be binding on the parties, despite subsequent
litigation results in comparator cities. However, the parties may present evidence
of the arguments in any such litigation to the referee and arbitrator, who may
give that evidence whatever consideration they deem appropriate.

 

428397 70
City Of El Paso
Police Department Wage Scale
June 1, 2014

 

    

    
 
 
 
   
  
    
  
 
   
  
  
 

[Police Officer _

    
 

Advanced

    
  
 

   
 

Senior

  
 
   
  
  

   

Monthly
4 - Weeks

  

Lieutenant

40,525.16 | 42, BL 34 | 44,678.92
3,377.10 | 3,545.95 | 3,723.24
3,117.32 | 3,273.18 | 3,436.84
1,558.66 | 1,636.59) 1,718.42
19.483250} 20.457375|_21.480250)

49,258.56 | 51,721.54 | 54,307.50

   
 

   
  
    
   
 

Police Officer/ 4,104.88 | 4,310.13 | 4,525.63
Detective 3,789.12 | 3,978.58 | 4,177.50
1,894.56 | 1,989.29 | 2,088.75

   
 

23.682000| 24.866125|_ 26.109375)
58,733.74 | 60,495.76 | 62,310.56
Police Officer/ 4,894.48 | 5,041.31} 5,192.55
4,517.98 | 4,653.52 | 4,793.12
2,258.99 | 2,326.76 | 2,396.56
29.957000|

  

   

46,912.84
3,909.40
3,608.68
1,804.34
22.554250)
57,022.94
4,751.91
4,386.38
2,193.19
27414875
64,179.96 | 66,105.26
5,348.33 | 5,508.77
4,936.92 | 5,085.02
2,468.46 | 2,542.51
31.781375.
68,228.85
5,685.74
5,248.37
2,624.19
32802333
72,863.96

    
  
 

63,710.14
5,309.18
4,900.78
2,450.39
30.629875)

    
  
 
 
 
 
 

  
  

     
   
   
  
   
   
 

      
   
  
      
  
   
  

72,747.57
6,062.30
5,595.97
2,797.98
34.974792|
82,114.11

    
    
  
  
  
 

 

70,131.10
5,844.26
5,394.70
2,697.35
33.716875

77,266.28

6,438.86

5,943.56

2,971.78

37.147250

91,364.26

       
   
   
  
  
   
   
 
  
 

  
  
   
  
  
 

 

     
  
  
 
 

Monthly
4 - Weeks
Bi - Weekly

 

   

  

Assistant Chief

 

Bi - Weekly
Hourh

 

 

 

pat sy C1003

 

9,222.98
8,513.52
4,256.76
53.209500
128,120.98
10,676.75
9,855.46
4,927.73
61.596625

  
  
   
  
 
  
      
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 

6,072.00 | 6,842.84} 7,613.69

5,604.92 | 6,316.47] 7,028.02

2,802.46 | 3,158.24} 3,514.01
35.030750} _39.477938| 43.925125

|Commander Annual 82,143.88 | 93,774.72 | 105,405.56
Monthly 6,845.32 | 7,814.56] 8,783.80

4 - Weeks 6,318.76 | 7,213.44) 8,108.12

Bi - Weekly 3,159.38 | 3,606.72} 4,054.06
39.492250} 45.084000| _50.675750}

Deputy Chief Annual 110,675.76 | 116,209.60 | 122,020.08

9,684.13
8,939.20
4,469.60
55.870000)
134,527.12
11,210.59
10,348.24
5,174.12
64.676500}

    
  
   
  
  

 

 

10,168.34
9,386.16
4,693.08
58.663500
141,253.58
41,771.13
10,865.66
5,432.83
67.910375

   
   
 
   
    
 
1.25%

City Of El Paso
Police Department Wage Scale
November 16, 2014

 
    

Police Officer

  
    

   

     
  
 

 
  
 

3,314.10
1,657.05
20.713125

   

1,918.25
23.978125

2,014.16
25.177000}

   

 

21.748750|

 

  

 

45,237.40

3,479.80
1,739.90

Advanced Annual 54,986.62
Police Officer/ {Monthly 4,156.21 | 4,364.01 | 4,582.22} 4,811.32
‘Detective 4 - Weeks 3,836.50 | 4,028.32 | 4,229.74 | 4,441.22

2,114.87
26.435875

 

 

 

 
 
  

  
   

 
  

 

 

        
   
 
 

   

   

  
  
  
  
    
 

 

   

 

 

 

   
 
   

   

 

    
 
  
 
  
  
 
   

 

 

Lieutenant Annual PS 73,774.74 | 83,140.59 | 92,506.44
Monthly 6,147.90} 6,928.38] 7,708.87

4 - Weeks 5,674.98 | 6,395.43] 7,115.88

Bi - Weekly 2,837.49 3,197.72 3,557.94
Hourly 35.468625| _39.971438] 4.474250]

|Commander Annual P6 83,170.62 | 94,946.93 | 106,723.24
Monthly 6,930.89 7,912.24 8,893.60

4 - Weeks 6,397.74 7,303.61 8,209.48

|Bi - Weekly 3,198.87 3,651.81 4,104.74
Hourly _ 39.985875|__45.647563} _51.309250;

‘Deputy Chief |Annual 112,059.48 123,545.50
Monthly 9,338.29 10,295.46

4 - Weeks. 8,619.96 9,503.50

4,309.98 4,751.75
53.874750) 59.396875)

Assistant Chief 136,209.06 | 143,019.50
Monthly 11,350.76 | 11,918.29

4 - Weeks 10,477.62 | 11,001.50

Bi - Weekly 5,238.81 | 5,500.75

 

Hour!

  
  

 

 

 

 

62.366750}

 

   
    
   
  
  
  

   
    
   
   
  
   
  
 

Senior 61,252.10 | 63,089.78 | 64,982.58 | 66,932.06 | 68,940.04 | 71,008.34
Police Officer/ 5,104.34 | 5,257.48 5,577.67 5,745.00 5,917.36
Detective ~ 4,711.70 | 4,853.06 5,148.62} 5,303.08) 5,462.18
2,355.85 | 2,426.53 2,574.31 2,651.54 2,731.09

Hourly. 28.590375] 29.448125|  30.331625) 32.178875] —33.144250] —34.138625;

Sergeant Annual Pa 64,506.52 | 69,081.74 | 73,656.96 | 78,232.18
Monthly 5,375.54 5,756.81 6,138.08 6,519.35

4 - Weeks 4,962.04} 5,313.98} 5,665.92] 6,017.86

Bi - Weekly 2,481.02 2,656.99 2,832.96 3,008.93

Hourl: 31,012750|__33.212375| _35.412000| __37.611625'

   
  

 
  

  
 
  
 
 

   

    
 
  
  

   
 

  

65.485125

  
  
  
  
 
 

   
   

 

 

68.759375,

 
Added levels highlighted
former level P3-6 designated P3-7
former level P3-7 designated P3-10

City OF EI Paso

Police Department Wage Scale
‘September 1, 2015

‘THIS PAY SCHEDULE SHOWS PAY STEPS PRIOR TO APPLING REQUIRED INCREASES FROM MARKET SURVEY FOR FY16 AND IS FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY

 

 

  
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
  
 
    
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 
  

 
   

    

    
   
   
   
 

   

 

 
 

       
     

 

 
     
      
 

 

   
   

 

    

“Teva | Level “| Level Tevel Level Level Level Level Level Level Level
One Two Three Four Five Six Seven Eight Nine Ten Eleven,
‘47,031.64 | 43,083.30 | 45,237.40 | 47,499.40
3,419.30) 3,590.28] 3,769.78] 3,958.28
3g1410{ 347980| 365380] | ff
726750] 20.713125|
[Advanced "49,874.50 | 52,968.16 ~
Police Officer! 4,156.21] 4,364.01
Detective 3,836.50 | 4,028.32
4,918.25 | 2,014.16
23.978125| _25.177000| _26.435875| _27.757625| 1
Senior Ye 12 [Yr 49844] ve 15816, Yeoa7 [Yr 18848| Yr20 | Yr2t
Police Officer! 50,467.98 | 61,252.10 | 63,080.78 | 64,982.58 | 66,932.06 | 67,936.92 | 68,040.04 | 69,620.56 | .70,325.84'| 71,008.34 |72,428.46
Detective 5,104.94] 5,257.48] 5,415.22] 5,577.67] 5,661.33] 5,745.00] ~5,80248] 5,860.48 | 5,917.36 | 6,035.71
4711,70| 4,853.06 | 4,998.66 | 5,148.62]: 5,225.84} 5,303.08 | 5,356.12 | 6,409.68] 5,462.18 | 5,571.42
2,385.85] 2,426.53] 2,499.33] 2,574.31] 261292] 2,651.54] 2,676.08]. 2,704.84 | 2,731.09 | 2,785.74
29.448125|  30.331625] _31.241625| 3.178875} 32.661500| _33.144250] _ 33.475750] 33.810500|_34.138625| _34.821375|
Sergeant . 64,506.52 | 69,081.74 | 73,656.96 | 78,232.16 | 79,796.86,
5,375.54] §,756.81| 6,138.08 | 6,519.35 | 6,640.74
4,962.04 5,313.08 5,665.92] 6,017.86} 6,138.22
2,481.02} 2,656.99] 2,632.96] 3,008.93
31.012750| _33.212375|__35.412000| __37.611625|
[Lieutenant 73.74.74 | 63,140.59 | 92,506.44
6,147.90] 6,926.38] 7,708.87
5,674.98 | 6,395.43) 7,115.88
2,837.49 | 3,197.72] 3,557.94
35.468625| _39.971438] _44.474250|
(Commander 83,170.62 | 94,946.93 | 706,723.24
6,93089| 7,91224| 8,693.60
6,307.74 | 7,303.61 | 6,208.48
3,198.87] 3,651.81] 4,104.74
39.985875 sous] 51,308251
42 | 101,649.26 | 106,723.24 | 112,059.48 | 117,662.48 | 123,545.50
8,470.19 | 8,893.60] 9,338.29} 9,805.21] 10,205.45

 

  
 

718.56 | 8,200.48 |
}-"-3,908:28 | 4,106.74
48866000) __$1.309250)
742,059.48 | 117 662.48 | 123,545.50,
9,805.21} 10,285.46
» 9.050:96 { - 9,503.50
4,825.48} © 4,751.75
'56.568500] _ 59.396875|

8,619.06 | 9,050.96 | 9,503.50
4,309.98 | 4,525.48 | 4,751.75
$3,874750| _6,568500| _59.306875| to

120,722.84 | 136,208.06 | 143,018.50

10,810.24 | 11,350.76 | 11,918.29

9,978.68 | 10,477.62 | 11,001.50

4,989.34 5,238.81 5,500.75

62.366750| _ 65.485125] _68.759375)

 
    
    

 

  

 

 

 
    
    
 

    
   
  

    
  

 
  
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“Applicants are placed into P3-5 on their 12th anniversary, P3-6 on their 13th anniversary, P3-7 on their 1Sth anniversary, P3-8 on their 17th anniversary, P3-9 on their 18th
anniversary, P3-10 on their 20th anniversary and P3-11 on their 21st anniversary. Anniversary in this instance is the number of years since graduating from the Academy.

“When promoting from PS to P8, applicant will be placed into P6-1. When promoting from P6-8 to P8, applicant will be placed into P8-3. When promating from P6-7 to P8, applicant
will be placed into P8-2.

   
   

 

bate y-€1003

 
CODE

7542
7543
7551
7544
7552
7561
7562
7563
7566
7567

428397

APPENDIX “B”

POLICE CLASS TITLES

LASS TITLE

Police Officer
Advance Police Officer
Police Detective
Senior Police Officer
Senior Detective
Police Sergeant

Police Lieutenant
Police Commander
Police Deputy Chief
Police Assistant Chief

 

vy C1003

Pt
P2
P2
P3
P3
P4
PS
P6
P7
P8

71
APPENDIX “C”
IMPASSE PROCEDURE

Negotiations for a new contract shall commence in accordance with
Chapter 174 of the Local Government Code. If impasse should be reached as
defined in Chapter 174, either party may request mediation, and upon such
request the parties shall immediately proceed to choose one mediator as
provided herein. The function and powers of the mediator shall be as specified in
Section 174.151. The mediation shall be extended for fourteen (14) calendar
days, or such other period as it mutually agreeable to the parties.

If no agreement is reached through mediation, upon request of either
party, the parties shall submit the dispute to one Fact Finder, chosen as provided
herein. The Fact Finder shall conduct a full and fair hearing on all unresolved
issues. The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
After hearing all evidence offered by the parties and any evidence requested
independently by the Fact Finder, the Fact Finder shall render a written decision
making findings of fact and recommendations as to all matters in dispute. In the
opinion the Fact finder shall state the reasons for the findings of fact and
recommendations. In rendering such finding and recommendations the Fact
Finder shall exercise independent judgment and shall not attempt to “split the
difference”.

In making the findings of fact’ and recommendations of the Fact Finder
shall consider, inter alia, the following evidence submitted to them by the parties
or obtained at the Fact Finder's direction: the overall compensation in the current
contract including direct salary and fringe benefits; the income available to the
City and demands on that income; a comparison of wages, hours and conditions
of employment of El Paso Police Officers with the wages, hours and conditions of
employment of other public and private employees performing similar services
and with other employees generally in public and private employment in
comparable communities and in El Paso; the hazards of employment, physical,
educational, and mental qualifications, job training and skills required of an El
Paso Police Officer; the cost of living in El Paso for the preceding twelve month
period using localized data to the fullest extent feasible; and any current national
or state policies or guidelines with respect to compensation.

The selection of the mediator and the Fact Finder shall occur as follows:
when either party requests mediation or fact finding, the parties may agree to
choose any mediator of fact finder or method of choosing same. If no agreement
occurs within five (5) days from the request, the parties shall request a list of
seven neutrals from the American Arbitration Association (AAA). Upon receiving

 

2 C1008

428397 " R
the list, the parties shall select the mediator or fact finder by alternately striking
names. The request to AAA shall state the dates on which the neutrals must be
available. The mediator and the fact finder shall be selected within five (5) days
after the receipt of the list from the AAA. The fee and expenses of the mediator
and the fact finder shall be split equally between the City and the Association. All
other expenses, including witness fees, shall be paid by the party incurring the
expense or calling the witness.

Tf, within seven days after the fact finding, the parties have failed to agree
to contract, the major, unresolved issues shall be submitted to the qualified
voters of El Paso in a referendum election according to the following procedure.
The election shall be held on the first date permissible under state law. By
agreement the parties may submit any issue or issues to the voters. If no such
agreement is reached, the each party shall be entitled to submit two issues to
the voters, each issue on one distinct topic. For example, each of these
constitute a distinct issue: salary, dependent health insurance coverage,
promotional procedures, political activities. Each party will submit its two issues,
and its alternatives to the other party's issues, so that the voters will vote on four
distinct issues. Each voter will have the option of voting for all the issues of one
party, or for some issues of one party and some of the other. The issues
submitted to the voters will appear on the ballot exactly as each respective party
would have them appear in the contract. The decision on each issue by a
majority of the voters voting on the issue at the referendum election shall be
binding on the parties, subject to the laws of Texas, and shall be adopted as part
of the collective bargaining agreement. In the absence of agreement of the
parties to the contrary, the term of the provisions adopted by the voters shall be
the same as the term of entire contract entered into by the parties, or, in
absence of such a contract, shall extend until the next August 31 following the
election or until a new contract is agreed upon. The Association shall pay the
cost of printing the ballots. All other costs of the election shall be paid by the
City. The place of the respective parties on the ballot shall be determined by coin
flip.

 

428397 73
APPENDIX “D”
REQUEST FOR LATERAL TRANSFER FORM

TO: CHIEF OF POLICE

 

REQUEST FOR LATERAL TRANSFER
OF JOB ASSIGNMENT
1, am formally requesting that I be considered
for
(Job Title) (Job Grade) (Department)

the next time there is a permanent vacancy and the Chief plans to fill that
vacancy.

 

(Employee Signature)

(Present Job, Title, Grade, Department)

(Date)

cc: Employee File
Personnel

 

428397 74
APPENDIX “E”
PERSONNEL FILES
(Section 143.089, Local Government Code)

(a) The Director or the Director’s designee shall maintain a permanent
personnel file on each fire fighter and police officer. The personnel file must
contain any letter, memorandum, or document relating to:

(1) | a commendation, congratulation, or honor bestowed on the
fire fighter or police officer by a member of the public or by the employing
Department for an action, duty, or activity that relates to the person’s official
duties:

(2) any misconduct by the fire fighter or police officer if the
letter, memorandum, or document is from the employing Department and if the
misconduct resulted in disciplinary action by the employing Department in
accordance with this Act; and

(3) the periodic evaluation of the fire fighter or police officer by
a supervisor.

(b) A letter, memorandum or document relating to alleged misconduct
by the fire fighter or police officer may not be placed in the person’s permanent
personnel file if the employing Department determines that there is insufficient
evidence to sustain the charge of misconduct.

(c) _ A letter, memorandum or document relating to disciplinary action
taken against the fire fighter or police officer or to alleged misconduct by the fire
fighter or police officer that is placed in the person ‘s permanent personnel file as
provided by Subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be removed from the
employee's file if the Commission finds that:

(1) _ the disciplinary action was taken without just cause; or

(2) the charge of misconduct was not supported by sufficient
evidence;

(d) If a negative letter, memorandum, document, or other notation of
negative impact is included in a fire fighter’s or police officers permanent
personnel file, the Director or the Director’s designee shall, within 30 days, notify
the affected fire fighter or police officer. The fire fighter or police officer may, on

 

428397 “ 75
or before the 15th day after the date of receipt of the notification, file a written
response to the negative letter, memorandum, document, or other notations.

(e) _ The fire fighter or police officer is entitled, on request, to a copy of
any letter, or document placed in the person’s permanent file. The City may
charge a fire fighter or police officer a reasonable fee not to exceed the actual
cost for any copies provided under this subsection.

(f) | The Director or the Director's designee may not release any
information contained in a fire fighter’s or police officer's permanent personnel
file without first obtaining the person’s written permission, unless the release of
the information is required by law.

(g) A Fire or Police Department may maintain a personnel file on a fire
fighter or police officer employed by the Department for the Department's use,
but the Department may not release information contained in the Department
file to any agency or person requesting information relating to a fire fighter or
police officer. The Department shall refer to the Director or the Director's
designee a person or agency that requests information that is maintained in the
fire fighter's or police officer’s personnel file.

 

batt ns €1003

428397 76
428397

APPENDIX “F”
Drug and Alcohol Policy

 

77
EI Paso Police Department Drug & Alcohol Testing Policy

Purpose and Scope: The El Paso Police Department (EPPD) believes employees have a right to work in a drug and
alcohol free environment. Persons under the influence of drugs and alcohol on the job may pose serious safety, health and
security risks to the public and to other Department employees. In addition to the City’s Drug-Free Work Place Policy, _
~ “this” policy provides directives to all sworn employees of the EPPD concerning procedures for drug and alcohol testing.
Nothing herein shall replace or supersede any provision of the Drug and Alcohol Testing article in the Collective
Bargaining Agreement between the City of El Paso, Texas and the El Paso Municipal Police Officers’ Association

_..---(hereinafter referred to.as the SCBA”), — a

I, Random Testing:

f random drug testing (through urine or blood) will entail the 5 panel testing and include the following drugs:
: Marijuana, Cocaine, Opiates, Amphetamines, Phencyclidine

&

All sworn employees of the El Paso Police Department (hercinafter referred to in this policy as “employee” or

“employees”) are subject to random drug testing. Thirty percent (30%) of police officers of all ranks, including
the Chief of Police, shall be subject to mandatory random drug testing during each calendar year in accordance
with the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA).

 

 

A. Selection of Employees for Random Testing:

Employees shall be subject to random testing on a fair and impartial statistical basis. The fair
and impartial statistical basis (in which each police officer has an equal chance of being selected)
shall be by a non-discriminatory computerized program operated and certified as non-
discriminatory by an independent firm hired by the City, and the employee shall be tested upon
being selected by the computer. The firm shall generate a list upon request by the EPPD Human
Resources Manager (HRM)

1. The random list will be delivered to the HRM or designee by email, or hand delivered letter.
2. The HRM or designee will issue a written directive to each employee on the list, ordering them to
submit to drug testing at the specified date, time, and location, and will provide the reason for the

test (post-accident, random or reasonable suspicion).

3. Except when in actual use, possession of and access to the list of names will be limited to the
HRM and/or designee.

B. Notification to and Reporting by Employees for Random Testing

The El Paso Police Department HRM will coordinate with the testing vendor concerning the date, time,
location, and number of employees to be tested. The collection dates will not be announced to the
affected employee(s) in advance.

1, The HRM will provide the respective Commanders or designee with a list of names of those
employees selected for testing. The Notification to Report Form (Form #__) will be utilized.

2. The Commander or a Special Point of Contact (SPOC) will ensure that all selected employees are
ordered both orally, and in written directive using the Notification to Report Form (Form #__).

ae re
12-11-13 Page 1

 

vit sy C1003

   
a. The use of the Notification to Report Form (Form #___) serves as a direct order by
authority of the HRM on behaif of the Chief of Police to provide the necessary sample at
the specified location.

b. This notice also instructs the selected personnel to report to the specified collection

——~focation within two hours of being served with the notice.

3.The HRM shall coordinate the testing process to coincide with an employee's regularly scheduled

ee workday. - -

a. Supervisors will make every effort to ensure their employees report to the testing facility
immediately upon notification.

b. An employee with a legitimate conflict (such as court or training) wil] immediately
inform their supervisors of the conflict and must report for testing as soon as practical.

4. Supervisors will document the absence on the Notification to Report Form (Form #__) and
forward it to the HRM when an employee is on approved leave (including calling in sick the day
of the test). The form will be routed through the employee’s chain-of-command to the HRM via
e-mail, hand-delivery or interoffice mail.

5. Employees missing a scheduled test for any reason will be rescheduled for testing within 24 hours
upon the employee’s return, irrespective of any random sampling selection.

6. An employee who fails to report for testing at the specified date and time for any unapproved
teason, refuses, fails or is unable to provide an adequate specimen, shall be placed on
administrative leave pending review.

7. Employees who become involved in an emergency situation or police action while en route to the
testing facility must notify an on-duty supervisor as soon as practical and request a second
employee be dispatched to take over any necessary police functions. When relieved, the
employee scheduled for testing shall continue to the testing facility.

II. Collection Procedure
Collection of the necessary samples and analyses will be conducted by a contracted qualified and independent
firm/laboratory, in accordance with the CBA. After arriving at the specified collection location, employees will
comply with instructions received from screening personnel. Screening will only be done for prohibited drugs
and/or alcohol. No other substances will be screened, nor will any other medical tests be conducted or performed.
A. The collection dates will not be announced in advance.

B. Employees will be required to present their E] Paso Police Department identification card at the collection
location.

C. The samples will be provided in maximum feasible privacy.

D. Appropriate chain of custody procedures will be followed at all times at the collection facility and at the
laboratory that performs the analysis.

    

12-11-13

bat sy 1003

 
E. Personnel who are summoned to provide a specimen for analysis will remain at the collection location in
view of collection personnel until an adequate sample can be produced.

   
 
 

%
:
‘mployees will be required to remove the following items (as applicable) and place them in a secured locker: cap, i
(op uniform shirt, body armor, belt, sunglasses. Employees will be allowed up to 4 hours to provide an adequate | a

______I_Positive Test Results

A. If the initial screening indicates a positive test result, a second test of this specimen will be performed.
1, Aconfirmed positive report will only be made after this second test also comes back positive.
2. A confirmed positive test report will be maintained by the HRM ina secure area.

B. Once the HRM has received the initial notification from the drug-testing vendor that an employee has a
positive test result, the HRM will notify a supervisor in the employee’s immediate chain of command.

C. Upon notification of a positive test result, a notice of termination will be initiated and served on the
employee by his Department Director

D. Within two working days after receiving notification from his/her department director of the initial
positive test result, the employee will have the opportunity, at his own expense, to request that a re-test
be performed manually, utilizing the original split sample.

E. The sample will be maintained for a period of one (1) year.

F. Drug tests results will be made available to the affected employee upon written request, subject to
applicable rules, regulations and legal considerations.

G. In accordance with applicable privacy laws, drug test results and documentation about drug testing
results, other than disciplinary reports, shall be maintained in a secured (locked) cabinet in the office of
the HRM. A separate, confidential file will be maintained for each employee who submits to drug or
alcohol testing.

Disciplinary Actions

a) A verified, confirmed, positive test result which indicates illegal drug use — will result in termination
of the sworn member.

b) A verified, confirmed, positive test result which indicates controlled substance abuse or presence of
alcohol may result in disciplinary action up to and including termination of the sworn member.

c) A verified, confirmed, positive test result which indicates illicit anabolic steroid abuse may result in
disciplinary action up to and including termination of the sworn members.

prrnenemicmmmamtrny
‘sceneommmerareanrenmmem semen

12-11-13 Page 3

 

vat C1003
IV. Reasonable Suspicion Testing

Reasonable suspicion testing (through urine or blood) will entail 10 panel testing, anabolic steroid testing and
5 alcohol testing. A violation will occur when the employee has a breath alcohol concentration confirmation test
L level of 0.01 or greater. The 10 panel testing will be analyzed for at least the following drugs and any.adulterants:
i

steers

Marijuana (THC metaboliie), Cocaine, Amphetamines, Opiates (including heroin), Phencyclidine (PCP),
Barbiturates, Benzodiazepines, Methodone, Methaqualone, Propoxyphene

 

______} Steroids (Anabolic Steroids) include: Bolasterone, Boldenone,-Clostebot Dehydrochtoromethyt testosterone,

Fluoxymesterone, Mesterolone, Methyltestosterone, Nandrolone, Oxandrolone, Oxymetholone, Probenecid,
Stanozolol, Testosterone

on
a

A. “Reasonable Suspicion” shall be defined in accordance with the CBA.
B. Procedures for Reasonable Suspicion Testing

If a supervisor reasonably suspects that an employee subject to this policy is under the influence of a
prohibited drug, prohibited inhalant, alcohol, or appears impaired due to the abuse of a prescription drug,
the supervisor will:

1. Immediately remove the employee from performing regular duties, and, when possible, bring
the employee to a private area away from the observation of coworkers and/or the public.

2. Document in a supervisor’s log to the employee’s chain of command with a copy to the HRM
all observations leading to the suspicion.

i
t Supervisor will contact the on - call HR Supervisor via Communications to make notification.
*

3. Immediately request that the employee’s chain of command be contacted to authorize the
employee be relieved of duty.

4. If there is probable cause to believe a crime has been committed, then the appropriate arrest
procedures will be followed.

5. If there is no probable cause at this point to believe a crime has been committed, the supervisor
shall:

a. Notify the chain of command and the HRM.

b. Make arrangements for the employee to be taken home, and placed on administrative
leave unless a decision is made to immediately conduct a drug and/or test, in accordance
with this policy.

i. Collection procedures defined in Section II above will be followed with the
following condition: the affected employee will be escorted to the collection site
and will not be permitted to operate a vehicle.

V. Post- Accident/Firearm Discharge Testing
Conditions for Post- Accident/Firearm Discharge:

A. In accordance with the City’s Drug Free Policy, any sworn employee that is involved in a motor vehicle
accident or firearm discharge may be subject to a mandatory drug test.

12-11-13 Page 4

 
B. Collection procedures defined in Section II above will be followed with the following condition: the
affected employee will be escorted to the collection site and will not be permitted to operate a vehicle.

oe

%.
*

 

a

Supervisor will contact the on - call HR Supervisor via Communications to make notification.

 

   
   

{for-cither-post—firearm-diseharge-or post= accident sitmationsy may CORSIS! Of hair
oahu breath, urine or blood analysis.
1. Should the employee have at least 90 to 120 strands of 1.5 inches of hair available, the drug and alcohol

‘ testing may be done within 72 hours. If the employee removes any hair during the 72 hours following the
critical incident, employee will be disciplined.
2. Should the employee be hospitalized, the employee may also choose to authorize the HRM to conduct drug
‘ and alcohol tests on the blood tests obtained from the hospital; provided hospital policy allows for it.

 

3. If neither option I or 2 are available, the HRM will coordinate drug and/or alcohol testing within 48
hours after the following incidents:

Post-Firearm Discharge testing will be conducted under either of the circumstances listed below and will
entail 10 panel testing, anabolic steroid testing and alcohol testing.
a) Discharge of a firearm, on or off duty, whereby a person was the intentional or accidental object of
the shooting. This will include injury and non-injury shootings.
b) Discharge of a firearm on or off duty, while performing a law enforcement function. The following are
exceptions: discharge during training, discharge during weapon maintenance, approved shooting of
an animal, approved shooting of an object.

Post- Accident testing will be conducted under any of the circumstances listed below and will entail the 5
panel testing.
a) A sworn employee while driving a City vehicle, becomes involved in a vehicular accident which

results in a human fatality.

  

5) A sworn employee while driving a City vehicle, becomes involved in a vehicular accident and the
employee receives a moving traffic violation arising from the accident.

¢) A sworn employee while driving a City vehicle, becomes involved in a vehicular accident from which
any involved vehicle requires towing from the scene.

d) A sworn employee while driving a City vehicle, becomes involved in a vehicular accident from which

any person involved is transported from the scene for medical treatment.

f
i
|
I
i

causes the death or serious injury of another person }

"sean ie

" e) An event in which a sworn employee, on or off duty while performing a law enforcement function

VL. Responsibility for Reporting Legal Prescription Drug Use & Accidental Drug Exposure

A. If the medically approved and appropriate use of a prescription or over-the-counter drug adversely affect
any E| Paso Police Department employee's work performance or the safety of the employee or others, the
employee must bring this fact to the attention of his/her immediate supervisor.

B. The immediate supervisor will then inform the Commander and HRM. The HRM will make a
determination whether to question the employee's fitness for duty, and whether to limit, suspend or
modify the employee's work activity, or otherwise reasonably accommodate such adverse effect.

 

 
C. As part of this process, the employee may be requested to provide medical documentation of his/her
ability to safely and effectively perform the essential functions of the position.

D. Any information about the employee's medical condition obtained by a supervisor or manager is

“=  ——-———-gonfidential; and will be shared only on a need to know basis. Any documentation of such medical
information must be kept in the employee’s confidential file.

__ EE. _Employees subjected to the accidental exposure-of any iHegal drug must immediately notify the" ~~~ ~

supervisor on duty.

1. The supervisor wil] handle all accidental exposures as required by departmental policy.
Additional information that should be included are:

a. the substance the individual was exposed to;
b. the period of exposure; and
c. a brief statement explaining the necessity for exposure.

2. A copy will be forwarded to the El Paso Police Department HRM who will maintain this
documentation for use if needed in the drug-testing program.

VIL. Drug and Alcohol Abuse Treatment

The El Paso Police Department encourages any employee who has an alcoho! or other drug problem to seek
treatment before the problem manifests itself in a violation of this policy and before the employee has a
positive test result. To encourage employees to maintain a safe, healthy and productive work environment,
the City of El Paso provides an Employee Assistance Program as an option for an employee seeking
treatment. An employee may not self-refer once notification of a drug test has been made.

A. Employees are encouraged to voluntarily seek assistance for alcoho] or other drug problems.

1. All inquiries about assistance will be kept strictly confidential and will be disclosed only to those
persons with a legitimate business need to know.

2. An employee’s voluntary disclosure of an alcohol or drug problem before submitting to a drug
test or being requested to submit to a drug test may be considered by the Chief of Police as a
mitigating factor should the facts warrant the matter being handled as a disciplinary issue.

3. Information regarding the Employee Assistance Program is available at the E] Paso Police
Department’s HR Department located at PDHQ.

4. The El Paso Police Department will maintain the confidentiality of any request for such
information by an employee or family member.

B. Anemployee who is being treated for an alcohol or other drug problem may:
1. Be placed ona medical leave of absence when an employee has exhausted all Jeave balances.
2. Nothing in this policy is intended to conflict with the provisions of the Family and Medical Leave
Act (FMLA) or ADAAA, and in the case of any conflict, the provisions of the FMLA and
ADAAA prevail.

TE TL TI
12-11-13 : Page 6

 

ban C1003

 
 

C. An employee who seeks rehabilitation assistance must agree to the following:

1. Actively participate in an appropriate alcohol or other drug treatment program of a licensed,
accredited treatment facility, and follow all rules, guidelines, and recommendations of that
am or facility, including but not limited to, after-care recommendations;

 

2. Complete the treatment program, not reject any treatment or recommendations of the program or
facility, and not leave or discontinue the treatment program before being properly discharged;

3. Upon completion of the treatment program, agree to unscheduled, periodic drug tests for a period
of not less than one (1) year to be administered by the City’s alcohol and drug testing contract
vendor. The failure of a subsequent drug test shall result in termination or suspension of the
employee; and

4. Sign all necessary authorizations and consents to allow the treatment facility to furnish copies of
the employee's treatment records to El Paso Police Department's physician so that E] Paso Police
Department can monitor the employee’s treatment program. All documentation shall be
maintained in a secured (locked) cabinet in the office of the HRM. A separate, confidential file
will be maintained for each employee who submits to drug or alcohol testing.

D. An employee who seeks to return to active employment while undergoing treatment or after completing
treatment must make the request in writing and:

1. The employee must submit to a drug test and obtain a negative test result before returning to
work;

2. EI Paso Police Department's physician must determine that the employec is capable of returning
to full duty status;

3. The employee must comply with all El Paso Police Department rules, policies and procedures; and

4. The employee must agree to unscheduled, periodic drug tests for a period of not less than one (1)
year.

E, These guidelines apply only to one requested Jeave of absence. Any request for additional leave of
absence under this Drug and Alcohol! Abuse Treatment section will be handled on a case-by-case basis
and granted only at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, his designee, and as required by law. A
return to work agreement should be prepared by the affected employee’s immediate supervisor, and a
copy of this agreement should be sent to the E] Paso Police Department HRM.

 

 

 
APPENDIX “G”
TRANSFER PROCEDURES AND SPECIALTY UNIT ASSIGNMENT

PURPOSE: To establish procedure for processing employee requests for
transfer between work units and specialty unit assignment; to establish a timely
and orderly system of applying for and filling vacant positions; and to best utilize
the skills and talents of each employee.

POLICY:

A. It is the policy of the El Paso Police Department to give notice to all
eligible employees of potential openings or current vacancies. The
Department strives to ensure fair, equitable treatment and consideration
of all applicants for any position.

B. The Chief of Police retains the right to direct transfers deemed in the best
interest of the Department. These procedures will not apply to situations
when transfer of reassignment is deemed appropriate and in the best
interest of the Department.

Cc The Department also maintains provisions for temporary transfer (TDY) of
employees when it is deemed appropriate and in the best interests of the
Department.

AMENDMENTS: Nothing herein prohibits the Association and the Chief of
Police from meeting and conferring on amendments. Any amendments will be
attached as a Letter of Agreement signed by the Association and the Chief of
Police and adopted as a pilot program.

DEFINITIONS:

Transfer is the permanent reassignment of personnel from one work unit to
another. A transfer does not include the hire of any individual that carries a
Peace Officer's license from outside the El Paso Police Department. A transfer
does not include the hire of an individual who is currently employed with another
City Department.

Coordination. Planning, Research and Development Division (PRD) will
coordinate the application and selection process for vacancies of coveted
Positions. PRD is responsible for:

1. Maintaining files of position requirements and qualifications:

 

428397 : 78
2. Preparing and distributing electronic mail announcements of job
openings including the qualifications and filing period;

3. Collecting and forwarding applications to Division Commanders;

4. Verifying receipt of applications and returning incomplete
applications to the applicant;

5. Coordinating with Division Commanders to assure development of
objective measurements and evaluation criteria;

6. Assisting in the formation of interview panels if requested to do so;

7. Forwarding selection information and notify applicants of their final
status;

8. Maintaining a database of each request/vacancy/transfer
transaction for two years after selection;

9. Notifying the Chief of Police when a person has requested and
been denied transfer after four requests.

F. Requests to fill positions. Division Commanders will forward requests
to fill coveted positions through the Chain of Command to Planning,
Research and Development. Requests to fill non-coveted positions will be
coordinated through the Chief of Staff with the appropriate Bureau Deputy
Chief.

G. Applying for transfer. Individuals requesting transfer will submit their
request on the approved form directly to the person or division identified
in the email position announcement. A second (courtesy) copy will be
forwarded to the employee's Division Commander to advise of the intent
to seek transfer. Requests for transfer are not held back in any manner by
the requesting individual’s chain of command. All persons meeting the
minimum qualifications are considered applicants.

H. The interview process. Division Commanders may use an informal
interview process for filling non-coveted positions. An interview panel will
be convened positions using the following guidelines:

 

1003

428397 . , 79
1. The Division Commander will arrange for an interview panel to
interview all applicants. The panel will consist of three supervisors,
at least one of whom is from within the same division as the vacant
position. All applicants for the same position will be interviewed by
the same panel.

2. All interviewees will be asked the same questions and allotted the
same amount of time respond. The interview panel should be clear
on the questions that are to be asked, appropriate answers, and all
other criteria to be used in evaluating applicants prior to beginning
any interviews.

3. The panel will rate each applicant in one of the following
categories: (1) Highly qualified; (2) Qualified; or (3) Not qualified.
An explanation of the deficiencies causing a rating of “Qualified” or
“Not Qualified” will be forwarded along with the ratings to the
Unit/Section Commander.

4. At the time the interviews are scheduled, written notification shall
be made to the Association. The Association shall be allowed to
send a representative to sit in on the interviews.

L Selection. The Unit/Section Commander will recommend the selection of
an applicant from the pool of applicants rated as “Highly Qualified.” The
recommendation is forwarded in a memo containing a list of all applicants
and their rating through the chain of command to the Bureau
Commander. The Bureau Commander will recommend approval of the
selected individual or another person rated as “Highly Qualified” and
forward the recommendation through the Chief of Staff to the Chief of
Police who has final authority on all transfers.

J. Notification and Review. Transfer orders are prepared and distributed
by the Office of the Chief. Upon final approval of the transfer, PRD is
notified of the rating of all applicants, the name of the person selected
and the deficiencies noted by the interview panel resulting in a rating of
less than “Highly Qualified.” PRD will notify each applicant of their ratings,
any noted deficiencies and the name of the person selected for the
position. PRD will notify the Chief of Police of any person denied transfer
after four unsuccessful requests. An officer denied a transfer or job
assignment may file a written informational complaint with the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police shall meet personally with the officer within 30-
calendar days of written complaint being filed.

  

ws ©1003

428397 80
K. Minimum commitment. Employees receiving transfer are expected to
honor the minimum commitment period (if any) stipulated in the position
announcement. The commitment period excludes promotion and special
cases will be evaluated by the unit/section commander on an individual
basis. Outstanding transfer requests are purged at the time permanent
transfer is granted.

L. Temporary transfers (TDY). TDY transfers are approved through the
Chief of Staff. Temporary transfers do not change existing staff tables,
however, transfer papers are initiated by the Office of the Chief for
documentation purposes.

M. Patrol area transfers. Requests for transfer between areas may be
submitted by personnel assigned to patrol functions and general
detectives to the Chief of the Office of the Operations at any time. Such
requests will be considered, however staffing shortages and other
mitigating circumstances may prevent approval. Probationary officers may
not request transfers. Approved requests for patrol area transfers will be
forwarded through the Chief of Staff to the Chief of Police for final
approval and initiation of transfer papers.

N. Specialty unit assignments. Requests for assistance to and the
selection of persons to specialty unit positions follow the same procedure
as requests for transfer to all coveted positions except that interviews are
handled by the specialty unit commander who will also coordinate the
administration of any applicable physical or skills testing required. At the
conclusion of the process, the commander will evaluate all scores against
predetermined percentage weights and compile a ranked list of qualified
applicants. Selection will be made based upon the list.

 

428397 81
428397

APPENDIX “H”
January 25, 2002 Wage Formula Document

  

C1003

82
APPENDIX H

El Paso Police Department
January 25, 2002 ,

Index Calculation
Demonstration

Overview
+ About ERI
+ Salary Differentials Vs. Cost-of-Living
* Geographic Assessor
+ El Paso Texas vs. National Average - Graph
+ Annual Salaries, 25k to 45k for Eight Cities
+ Index Spreadsheet :
+ Sample Calculations and Formulas
+ Final Step
*_ Questions?

 
About ERI*

ooo om Sores ERI web-site and Methodology Disclaimer —-

« ERI Economic Research Institute serves
over 10,000 corporate subscribers in a role
that was once filled (internally) by
corporate statisticians, operations
researchers, industrial engineers,
compensation analysts, and similar middle
management support positions that have
largely disappeared from Human Resources

Departments.

About ERI (Continued)*

*Source: ERE web-site and Methodology Disclaimer

+ ERI’s research database software subscriptions are
available to management, analysts and consultants
and are now widely used by client organizations.
Subscribers include corporate compensation,
telocation, human resources...and U.S. and
Canadian public sector administrators (including
military, law enforcement, city/county, ~

_state/provincial, and federal government pay-
administrators).

 

 
+ Revenues for ERI are eamed soley from
software and publication sales

+ ERI does not provide fee-for-service
consulting.

About ERI (Continued)
* ERI is an information service
» All ERI reports are copyrighted

 
Salary Differentials Vs. Cost-of-Living*

_....fSource: ERI web-site Frequently Asked Questions

¢ Wage and Salary differentials reflect the
local demand and supply for labor.

+ Cost-of-living is dictated by the local
supply for goods and services.

Geographic Assessor
*Source: ERI web-site

»* The Geographic Assessor software and
databases calculate salary and cost-of-living
differentials between any of over 7,400+
U.S. and Canadian cities and neighborhocds ~
and summarizes both percentage and dollar
differentials between any base city and up
to 99 comparison cities at a-time.--

 
Geographic Assessor (Continued) ee

“Source: ERI web-site

+ Research for the Geographic Assessor

' software and databases focuses on the
presentation of wage and salary structures
for each geographic area based upon
consensus regression analyses of salary
surveys, and also incorporates summary
cost-of-living data from the Relocation
Assessor software and databases.

 

 
 

Index Spreadsheet

GEDGRAPHIC DIFFERENTIALS CALCULATED RELATIVE TO &. PASO, TEXAS WITH INDEX = {.00"

 

"Saree Eee emer hee (SO Repel: Some On TR °

 
Sample Calculations and

 
    
   

     
   
 
  

PS
Local | Local Index |Biweekly | Wage
. | Index Wage

ee es

ee | 93.80863%

ae mows (||
100.000% :

1,357.60 [1,220.86
89.92806% _

" The Final Step

    
   

+ The index adjusted biweekly base pay for
the seven competitive Cities are added .
together and divided by seven.

+ The average of the seven competitive Cities
becomes the “moving target” in each year
of the pay plan.

 
Questions?

 
APPENDIX “I”
GARRITY WARNING

I have been advised that I will be questioned as part of an Official
Administrative Investigation. I will be asked questions specifically directed and
narrowly related to the performance of my official duties or fitness for office. I
am entitled to all the rights and privileges guaranteed by the laws and the
Constitution of the United States, including the right not to be compelled to
incriminate myself in criminal matters. I also have certain rights granted to me
by the contract between the City of El Paso and the EPMPOA, and the Civil
Service Rules and Regulations. :

I have been further advised that if I refuse to testify or to answer
truthfully questions relating to the performance of my official duties or fitness for
duty, I will be subject to Department charges and disciplinary action up to and
including termination. If I do answer, neither my statements nor any information
or evidence gained by reason of such statements can be used against me in any
subsequent criminal proceedings. However, these statements and any
information or evidence gained by reason of such statements may be used
against me for any other lawful purpose including but not limited to disciplinary
action.

 

428397 “oS 83
APPENDIX “3”
PHYSICAL FITNESS

Upon ratification and execution of this Agreement, the Chief of Police and
the Association shall meet to discuss the development of a physical fitness
assessment model, adjusted for age and gender. A joint labor and management
committee will be formed to develop and implement a physical fitness
assessment within 180 days of this agreements. The recommendations of the
committee will be considered by the Chief of Police and will be implemented
within one year of the signing of this agreement. Any agreement between the
Association and Chief of Police shall be adopted as a Pilot Program through a
memorandum of understanding and ratified by the parties.

 

428397 " 84
APPENDIX “K”
SCHEDULE OF BENEFITS

 

 

[Famity Anmuat Dedoctib
Co-insurance paid by plan

Max Individual out of pocket

Max lifetime benefit

PCP Office Visit
Specialist Physician Office Visit
Services not ind in office visit

Annual preventitive care exam

  

 

Employees must enrol! for benefit;
covers $30 annual exam and $35
frames every 24 months

 

 

“$6,000.
| 100% [ox | 90% |

  
  

  

 

 

  
 
  

ded then 50%|
ded then 50% | ded then SO%

ded then 50% | ded then SO%

ded then 50% | ded then SO%
ded then 50%, $75

ded then 50% | ded then 50% | ced then 50%

  

 

 

    
  

$15
[ueatnensoox] $30 | $25

   
 

= ity Dental & Vision
| emponty| Family |
[City Dental | $0.00 _|

 

     
  

 

 
 

ded then 50% | ded then 50% | ded then 50%
ded then 50% | ded then 50% | ded then 50%

[ded then $0%| ded then 50% [ded then 50%

 

       

 

 

 

No out-of-network coverage

Employees must enroll for benefit
Indiv Ded $25; Family Ded $75; Annual
Benefit $750 w/ 80% Co-ins

 

[city vision | $0.00 | $0.00 _|

 

 
428397

APPENDIX “L”
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT POLICY

 

86
 

Policy ID: Human Resources
Subject: Outside Employment Policy en
oo Creation Date: January 17,2012

Revision Date:

Prepared By: Human Resources Department
Approved By: City Manager

Legal Review: John Batoon

DESCRIPTION: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT

I. Policy:

Regular full time members of the classified services shall be
permitted to work part time for other employers subject to the
provisions of this policy. Full time employees must recognize
that their primary duties are to the City of El Paso. Employees
are subject to call at any time for emergencies, special
assignments, overtime, and the Jike, and the obligations of
outside employment are always subordinate to the needs of the
City of El Paso. Regular part time employees are expected to
work all scheduled shifts.

Il. Procedures:
Request for outside employment must be submitted on
appropriate forms as provided by the Department of Human
Resources and must include the specific type of employment.

A. Application:

1, An employee must submit a request for permission to
work at outside employment to the Department Head for
approval. Request for outside employment shall not
exceed twenty-five (25) hours per week.

2, A Department Head may place reasonable limitations or.
conditions on the performance of any outside
employment.

3, Determination of limitations on outside employment will
be based upon the best interest of the City in furthering
professionalism, protecting the reputation of the
employee and City and ensuring the City receives full and
faithful service in return for its expenditure of resources.

4. If the Department Head believes an employment request
is inappropriate and does not meet the criteria established
by this policy, he must submit the request to a Deputy
City Manager or the City Manager and obtain his
concurrence prior to disapproving the request.

5. Applications that have been approved by the Department
Head will be valid for a period not to exceed two (2)
years from the date of approval, and only for the specific
type of employment approved.
uiOriginal application must be submitted before an
1

 
 
 

 
eee! een}

employes may change the type of employment for which
he has been approved.

. Each Department Head shall periodically review outside

employment within the department to ensure compliance
with this policy.

 

. It is the duty of each Department Head to 0 revoke “an

employee’s outside employment approval in the event the

employee fails to comply with the provision of this
~the conditions —of —

—poliey;—fails—to—conform—to—

qualifications, or receives an overall rating of less than
“Meets Performance Standards” on any regularly
scheduled Performance Report, provided further that a
Department Head may give an employee notice and
reasonable opportunity to cure their noncompliance or
other deficiency prior to revocation.

B._ Conditions that mav disqualify an emplovee for outside

1

   

batt 1003

 

V3 its:
Where it appears from the employee’s sick leave record
or other evidence that outside employment would
measurably impair the applicant’s ability to discharge
official duties and responsibilities with the City.

. Where outside employment, or the place where it is

performed, would likely bring either the City or the
employee into disfavor with the public, involve the
employee in violation of the Rules and Regulations of the
Commission or the employee’s department, or present the
employee with an actual or potential conflict of interest
respecting city employment.

. Where the employment, or the place where it is to be

performed, are such as to measurably impair the
employee’s efficiency, capability, or availability as an
employee of the City.

. Where the outside employment requires the employee to

appear in the official uniform of the employee’s City
employment where such practice would violate a rule of
the employee’s department or where the outside
employment would involve the service of civil process.

. Where the outside employment of a public safety

employee would involve the operation of, or employment
in, an establishment where the principle business is the
sale of intoxicating beverages.

. Where the outside employment could affect their ability

to make unbiased decisions or recommendations in the
duties of their job with the City.

. Where the outside employment could compromise their

independent judgment regarding recommendations or
choice of vendors or services that are provided City of El
Paso.

. When the outside employment exceeds the number of

hours allowed in any one calendar week more than twice
in a year, and is not reported to Department Head for a
determination of extenuating circumstances.
APPROVED BY:

    
   

Joyce Wilson, City Manager

 

Badin
Date

 
