MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING NO. 24
FOR JOINT SUBMISSION TO THE CITY COUNCIL REGARDING

POLICE OFFICERS, LIEUTENANT AND
BELOW REPRESENTATION UNIT

THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING made and entered into
this __1st__ day of July, 2011

BY AND BETWEEN

THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES

AND

THE LOS ANGELES POLICE PROTECTIVE LEAGUE
1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

GENERAL PROVISIONS

11
1.2
1.3
1.4
15
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

Recognition.
Term.
Calendar for Successor Memorandum of Understanding
Approval of MOU
Obligation to Support
Provisions of Law and Separability
City Management Rights...
City — League Relationship
Application of Los Angeles Administrative Code Division 4................

 
 
 

 

 

 

  

LEAGUE SECURITY/EMPLOYEE RELATIONS .

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

2.1 Actions by the Employee Relations Board .

2.2 Bulletin Boards

2.3. Unit Membership List..

2.4 Use of City Facilities ...

2.4.1 Attendance of Directors at Roll Calls or Other Department Meetings .
2.5  Management/League MeetingS ...........:eceeceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteaee
2.6 Release Time

2.7. Payroll Deductions and Dues

2.8 Surveys.

ON THE JOB... cece cee ce eeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaesaeeeeesaaseeesaaseeesaeseeseaesneeeaeeaee
3.1 Personnel Folders

3.2 Uniform, Maintenance and Equipment Allowance

3.3. Notice to Correct Deficiencies.

3.4 A Drug-Free Work Place

3.5 Substance TeSts oo... cece cece cece eeeceeeeeseceeeeseeseeeeseeseseeseeseeeeseeseaes

WORK SCHEDULES...

   
 

 

4.1 Regular Hours;
PLOCECUIES 0.0... eceecccceccee cece eeeceeceseeceeeesecescesseseseesseseseessesesseseesiaseseesiaes
4.2 Detective Hours
4.3 Special Events..
4.4 — Time Off for Oral and Written Promotional Examinations ..............00.
COMPENSATION .
5.1 Salaries...
5.2 Continuation of Longevity Pay ...

 

"UO
2
© wo ONUHTHORRARAA nonwenenenf

Be
RO

11

20

 
5.0

6.0

7.0

COMPENSATION (Continued)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
 
  
 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

   

   

 

  
 

 

 

 

5.3. Hazard Pay and Special Pay ..

5.4 Uniform Field Officer Incentive

5.5 Detective Incentive .....

5.6 Marksmanship Bonus .

5.7. POST Certificate Bonus

5.8 Premium Pay for Bilingual Skills

5.9 Temporary Higher Level Position 41
5.10 Salary Overpayments 42
OVERTIME

6.1 Overtime Provisions.

6.1.1 Definitions............

6.1.2 Cash Compensation of Overtime

6.1.3 Timely Payment of Overtime...

6.2 Accumulated Overtime

6.2.1 FLSA Agreement .

6.3 Court Time

6.4. DMV Telephonic Hearings

6.5 Off-Duty Standby Compensation

6.6 Overtime Compensation for Meetings Outside of Normal Work Hours 53
6.7. Overtime During Suspension or Unpaid Leave

6.8 Compensation for Firearms Qualification

6.9 Compensation for Medical Examinations

6.10 Show-up/No Work

BENEFITS noo. eccceceeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesaeeeeeseeseeeeaeseeeeeseseeeeeeneeeaee
7.1 Vacations and Vacation Pay...

7.1.1 Seniority for Vacations

7.1.2 Vacation Buyback

7.2 Separation From Service

7.3. Holidays and Holiday Premiums

7.4 Sick Leave Accrual .

7.5 Sick Leave Usage...

7.6 Accumulated Sick Leave

7.7. Family and Medical Leave

7.8 Family Illness ...

7.9

   

Bereavement Leave

 
7.0

8.0

9.0

10.0

TABLE OF CONTENTS

BENEFITS (Continued)

7.10
7.11
7.12
7.13
7.14
7.15

Health Insurance .
Dental Insurance .
Life Insurance .....
Injured On Duty Pay
Employee Assistance Program .
Death Benefit

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

7.16 Dependent Care Reimbursement Account ... 76
7.17 Healthcare Flexible Spending Account 76
7.18 ECucation FUN... cece cee cece c esses ceesececeseesecsseeseceesesaceeeeseaee 76
GRIEVANCES. 76
8.1 Definitions 77
8.2 Matters Not Grievable or Arbitrable 77
8.3. Responsibilities and Rights.. 79
8.4 Procedure

8.5 Emergency Grievance Review Procedure ...........ceeeceeeeseeeeeeneeeeeeeeeee 84
8.6 Procedures for Grievances Affecting a Class or Group of Employees 84
8.7 Expedited Arbitration Procedure ..0.......ceceeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaee 86

ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS ....

9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7

REPRESENTATION ...

10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6

  

Matters Subject to an Administrative Appeal
Notification of Employee; Request for Hearing
Purpose of Administrative Appeal Hearings
Selection of Hearing Officer; Responsibilities ..
Discovery; Subpoenas; Witnesses; Record of Hearing.
Findings and Recommendations of Hearing Officer
Final Determination .......0.ccccec cic cee ce eee ce ceeeseceesececeeeeseceeeeteaes

  

 

 

 

  

Right to Representation .
Personnel Complaint Interview Representative
Skelly/Employee Investigation Review Representative.
Administrative Appeal Representative
Grievance Representative
Conduct of All Representatives; Department Support

 

 

  

 
Appendix A-1:
Appendix A-2:
Appendix A-3:
Appendix B-1:
Appendix B-2:
Appendix B-3:
Appendix C-1:
Appendix C-2:
Appendix C-3:
Appendix D-1:
Appendix D-2:
Appendix D-3:
Appendix E-1:
Appendix E-2:
Appendix E-3:
Appendix F-1:
Appendix F-2:
Appendix F-3:
Appendix G-1:
Appendix G-2:
Appendix G-3:
Appendix H:
Appendix |:
Appendix J:
Appendix K:
Appendix L:
Appendix M:
Appendix N:

 

Letter of Intent

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Salary Schedules; Longevity Pay: July 1, 2011
Regular Pay

Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives
Salary Schedules; Longevity Pay: September 1, 2011
Regular Pay
Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives
Salary Schedules; Longevity Pay: July 1, 2012
Regular Pay
Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives
Salary Schedules; Longevity Pay: January 1, 2013
Regular Pay
Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives
Salary Schedules; Longevity Pay: July 1, 2013
Regular Pay
Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives
Salary Schedules; Longevity Pay: November 1, 2013
Regular Pay
Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives
Salary Schedules; Longevity Pay: March 1, 2014
Regular Pay
Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives
Salary Administration

Longevity, Assignment, Special and Hazard Pay
Time Conversion for Work Hours

Court Overtime Exemplar

Dispute Resolution

Family and Medical Leave Act Provisions

Code 7

 

Miscellaneous Agreements

-iv-
SECTION 1.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 1.1 RECOGNITION

A.

Pursuant to the provisions of the Employee Relations Ordinance of the City and
applicable State law, the Los Angeles Police Protective League (hereinafter referred
to as “League”) was certified on November 22, 1972, by the Employee Relations
Board as the majority representative of City employees in the POLICE OFFICERS,
LIEUTENANT AND BELOW UNIT (hereinafter referred to as “Unit”) previously found
to be appropriate by the Employee Relations Board.

Management (Mayor, City Council, Board of Police Commissioners, Chief of Police,
City Administrative Officer [CAO]) hereby recognizes the League as the exclusive
representative of the employees in said Unit, subject to the right of an employee to
self representation. The term "employee" or "employees" as used herein, shall refer
only to employees in the classifications listed in the Appendices, as well as such
classes as may be added hereafter to the Unit by the Employee Relations Board.
Work that is presently performed by employees of the Unit may not be contracted
out to non-bargaining unit members without the agreement of the League.

ARTICLE 1.2 TERM

A.

The term of this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) shall commence on the date
when the terms and conditions of its effectiveness, as set forth in Article 1.4,
Approval of Memorandum of Understanding, are fully met, but in no event shall said
MOU become operative prior to 0001 on July 1, 2011. This MOU shall expire and
otherwise be fully terminated at 2400 on June 30, 2014; however, non-economic
provisions and economic provisions without a specific ending date shall remain in
full force and effect during the meet and confer process leading to a successor
agreement.

The terms and conditions contained in this MOU shall remain in full force and effect
throughout the entire term of this MOU. Any request to modify a specific provision
of this MOU during the term of the contract shall be processed as a requested MOU
amendment through the Office of the City Administrative Officer.

ARTICLE 1.3 CALENDAR FOR SUCCESSOR MEMORANDUM OF

UNDERSTANDING
A written request to commence meet and confer sessions for a successor MOU
shall be submitted by the requesting party during the period from February 1, 2014,
through March 31, 2014.

Meet and confer sessions shall begin by mutual agreement of both parties.
ARTICLE 1.4 APPROVAL OF MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

This MOU shall become effective when:

A. The agreement has been ratified by the members of the Unit; and

B. The agreement has been approved by the City Council in the manner required by
law.

ARTICLE 1.5 OBLIGATION TO SUPPORT

The League and Management agree that prior to the implementation of this MOU and
during the period of time it is being considered by the City Council for action, neither the
League nor Management, nor their authorized representatives will appear before the City
Council nor meet with the members of the City Council individually to advocate any addition
or deletion to the terms and conditions of this MOU. However, this Article shall not preclude
the parties from appearing before the City Council to advocate or urge the adoption and
approval of this MOU.

ARTICLE 1.6 PROVISIONS OF LAW AND SEPARABILITY

This MOU is subject to all current and future applicable federal and State laws and the City
Charter. If any Article, part, or provision of this MOU is in conflict or inconsistent with such
applicable provisions of federal or State laws, or the Charter of the City of Los Angeles, or
is otherwise held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, said
Article, part, or provision shall be suspended and superseded by such applicable law or
regulations, and the remainder of this MOU shall not be affected thereby.

All Appendices and Letters of Intent attached hereto are hereby incorporated and made
part of this MOU.

ARTICLE 1.7 CITY MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

A. Responsibility for management of the City and direction of its work force is vested in
City officials and department heads whose powers and duties are specified by law.
In order to fulfill this responsibility, it is the exclusive right of City management to
determine the mission of its constituent departments, offices and boards, set
standards of services to be offered to the public and exercise control and discretion
over the City organization and operations. It is also the exclusive right of City
management to take disciplinary action for proper cause, relieve City employees
from duty because of lack of work or other legitimate reasons and determine the
methods, means and personnel by which the City's operations are to be conducted
and to take any necessary actions to maintain uninterrupted service to the
community and carry out its mission in emergencies; provided, however, that the
exercise of these rights does not preclude employees or their representatives from
consulting or raising grievances about the practical consequences that decisions on
these matters may have on wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of
employment.

B. The City agrees that there will be no mandatory furloughs of Unit members during
the term of this MOU.

ARTICLE 1.8 CITY-LEAGUE RELATIONSHIP

A. Continuity of Service to the Public
The City of Los Angeles is engaged in public services requiring continuous
operations that are necessary to maintain the health and safety of all citizens. The
obligation to maintain these public services is imposed both upon the City and the
League during the term of this MOU.

B. Mutual Pledge of Accord
Inherent in the relationship between the City and its employees is the obligation of
the City to deal justly and fairly with its employees and of the employees to
cooperate with their fellow employees and the City in the performance of their public
service obligation.
It is the purpose of this MOU to promote and ensure harmonious relations,
cooperation and understanding between the City and the employees represented by
the League and to establish and maintain proper standards of wages, hours and
other terms or conditions of employment.

Cc. No Strike-No Lockout

In consideration of the mutual desire of Management and the League to promote
and ensure harmonious relations and in consideration of the Mutual Pledge of
Accord, the City stipulates that there shall be no lockout, or the equivalent, of
members of the League, and the League and its members stipulate that there shall
be no strike resulting in the withholding of service by the members during the term of
this MOU as set forth in Article 1.2. Should such a strike or actions by League
members occur, the League shall immediately instruct its members to return to
work. If they do not report to work immediately upon instructions of the League, they
shall be deemed to have forfeited their rights under this MOU. The curtailing of
operations by the City in whole or part for operational or economic reasons shall not
be construed as a lockout.

The provisions of the above paragraph shall not detract in any way from any
restrictions imposed by law on strikes and other types of work stoppages by public
employees.
ARTICLE 1.9 APPLICATION OF LOS ANGELES ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
DIVISION 4

Sections of Los Angeles Administrative Code Division 4 as they existed on the effective
date of this MOU pertaining to police officer classifications, salaries, salary administration,
benefits and other terms or conditions of employment that are not inconsistent with the
provisions herein are hereby incorporated into this MOU.

SECTION 2.0 LEAGUE SECURITY/EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
ARTICLE 2.1 ACTIONS BY THE EMPLOYEE RELATIONS BOARD

Should any action(s) by the Employee Relations Board prior to the expiration of this MOU
result in any significant changes to the composition of this representation unit, Management
and the League will meet and confer as soon as possible thereafter to consider any
revisions or amendments thereto that may be required to ensure that the interests of newly
acquired members to this representation unit are protected.

ARTICLE 2.2 BULLETIN BOARDS

The Police Department shall provide bulletin board space at each work location which may
be used by the League for posting notices of official League business. If a notice is
believed to be inappropriate for placement in the workplace, the Employee Relations
Administrator shall resolve all conflicts.

ARTICLE 2.3 UNIT MEMBERSHIP LIST

Management will provide the League, within 30 days from the effective date of this MOU
and each 30 days thereafter, an electronic file in PaySR format, or any subsequently
developed and adopted format, of Unit members listing the employee's name, employee
number, class title, home address, home phone number, and division of assignment, as
applicable. Such file shall identify employees off payroll and the reason therefore.

ARTICLE 2.4 USE OF CITY FACILITIES

A. The League may use City facilities with prior approval for the purpose of holding
meetings to the extent that such facilities are made available to the public, and to
the extent that such use of the facility will not interfere with normal departmental
operations. With the prior approval of the Area commanding officer, roll call rooms
may be made available for League meetings. Participating employees will attend
said meetings on their own time except as provided for in Article 2.4.1.

B. If the use of a facility requires a fee for rental or special set-up, security, and/or
cleanup service, the League will provide or assume the cost of such service(s) or
facility.
ARTICLE 2.4.1 ATTENDANCE OF DIRECTORS AT ROLL CALLS OR OTHER
DEPARTMENT MEETINGS

A. Any League Director wishing to address members at a roll call or other Department
meeting shall obtain approval directly from the concerned division commanding
officer. Only an employee at the rank of Captain or above may grant such approval.
If the request is not approved, the Director may appeal the decision to the Employee
Relations Administrator, whose decision shall be final.

Management is under no obligation to approve any requests by Directors to address
on-duty employees. Violation of this Article by a Director may constitute an Unfair
Employee Relations Practice pursuant to Los Angeles Administrative Code
§4.860(b)(3).

Exception: This Article shall not apply to any Director who is attending department-
mandated training, during meetings with management to discuss or resolve mutual
problems relating to employer-employee relations, or other meetings of a similar
nature.

B. The Department will grant League representatives scheduling priority for on-duty
presentations at Department facilities to employees regarding collectively bargained
and other benefits. Such presentations shall not interfere with normal Department
operations.

Cc. The Department shall not permit vendors to access on-duty employees in non-public
areas of Department facilities other than those that are mutually agreed upon by the
Department and the League.

ARTICLE 2.5 MANAGEMENT/LEAGUE MEETINGS

Meetings at reasonable intervals may be scheduled at the request of the President of the
League or the authorized representatives of the City Council and/or Police Department for
the purpose of informally discussing potential employer/employee relations problems.

ARTICLE 2.6 RELEASE TIME

A. The City shall permit up to nine employees elected as League Directors time off for
full-time employee organization representation activities. The terms of this Article will
continue in effect during negotiations and all applicable City impasse procedures. In
the event the League should desire to reduce or increase this number of Directors,
the League shall provide the Police Department with fourteen days notice of such
change. In any situation deemed an emergency, the League shall contact the
Employee Relations Administrator for mutual resolution of the situation.

B. The League shall reimburse the City for the release of League Directors on a
quarterly basis in an amount to be determined and billed by the City Administrative
Officer. Such amount shall not exceed $750,000 in any fiscal year during the term
of this MOU. The due date for the payments shall be September 30, December 31,
March 31, and June 30 of each applicable year.

Failure of the City to receive reimbursement as stated above, within forty-five days
of the quarterly due date, shall constitute the immediate revocation of this provision
and the immediate reassignment of the Directors to regular duties for their current
class and pay level. At the time such payment is received, this provision will become
fully reinstated.

During the period of time a Director is in the service of the League, the Director shall
not receive any accrual of vacation or sick leave credit. These benefits are the
responsibility of the League. Likewise, no deduction from either of the benefits will
be made by the City.

No overtime for League activities will be authorized or paid for any Director covered
by this provision, nor will the Directors be eligible for or paid premium holiday pay
provided for elsewhere in this Agreement. Except, however, for police activities and
qualifying, overtime will be compensated in accordance with the provisions of this
MOU.

Directors acting in the capacity of full-time employee organization representatives
are peace officers employed by the Los Angeles Police Department. As such, they
remain subject to the rules, regulations and Code of Conduct provisions applicable
to such representatives and all benefits and responsibilities provided for under
Section 1070 of the Los Angeles City Charter. If a League Director is served with a
notice of intended discipline that the League believes violates Los Angeles
Administrative Code §4.860(a)(2), the Director shall have ten business days to serve
the Chief of Police with a copy of the Unfair Employee Relations Practice claim filed
at the Employee Relations Board regarding this matter. The Chief will not take the
contemplated disciplinary action until the Board has adjudicated the unfair charge.
The Chief and the League will request an expedited proceeding. If the contemplated
disciplinary action is found to be an Unfair Employee Relations Practice by the
Board, the Chief will not proceed with the disciplinary action.

Note: “Notice of intended discipline” shall mean service of a Complaint and Relief
From Duty, Suspension or Demotion, Form 1.61, fora suspension and/or demotion
which is not appealed to a Board of Rights or administrative appeal; or a Decision of
the Board and Execution of the Order, Form 1.73; or a Decision of the Hearing
Officer Administrative Appeal Hearing and Order of the Chief of Police, Form 1.73.1.

In the event that a League Director serves a suspension, the Director may continue
to perform his or her duties as a Director but shall not act in the capacity of a peace
officer or conduct City-related business during such suspension. At the end of each
fiscal year, the CAO shall compute the amount of reimbursement not required for
any period of suspension served by an active League Director and shall reduce the
amount of reimbursement required from the League for the following fiscal year and
shall notify the appropriate parties.

During normal business hours or while conducting City-related business, the League
Directors shall be considered for Workers' Compensation and pension benefits as
employees of the City of Los Angeles and entitled to all benefits that other police
officers are entitled to under Division 4 of the Labor Code, the Los Angeles City
Administrative Code and the Los Angeles City Charter in the sections and articles
applicable to police officers. This provision shall not be limited to normal business
hours when a Director is performing the regular duties of a Los Angeles Police
Officer.

The League shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City and its officers and
employees harmless against any and all claims, suits, demands or other forms of
liability that might arise out of or result from any action taken by a Director in the
service of the League (excluding Workers’ Compensation).

League Directors shall be required to qualify once per calendar year during the
month of February, March, April, May, September, October, November or
December. This qualification requirement shall be met with the officer’s primary duty
handgun and duty ammunition. Directors are exempt from shotgun qualification.

Except for the provisions of Paragraph C of this Article and misconduct that would
warrant a paygrade reduction, when a Director returns to regular duties with the Los
Angeles Police Department for any other reason, the Director shall be assigned toa
position for his or her current class and paygrade. It shall be the Department’s
option whether a Director is returned to a position for which there is hazard, bonus
or special pay.

ARTICLE 2.7 PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS AND DUES

A.

During the term of this MOU, League dues and such other deductions as may be
properly requested and lawfully permitted will be deducted by the City Controller
biweekly in twenty-four increments annually from the salary of each employee in the
Unit who files with the City Controller a written authorization that such deductions be
made.

Remittance of the aggregate amount of all dues and other proper deductions made
from the salaries of employees hereunder shall be made to the League by the City
Controller within thirty working days after the conclusion of the month in which said
dues and/or deductions were deducted.

A fee of nine cents ($.09) per deduction shall be assessed by the City Controller for
the processing of each payroll deduction taken. The City Controller will deduct the
aggregate amount of said fees on a biweekly basis.
ARTICLE 2.8 SURVEYS

Any survey received by the Department which requests the input of Unit members must be
forwarded to the Employee Relations Administrator (ERA) for evaluation and approval. If
the ERA disapproves the survey, no further action is required. If the ERA believes the
survey complies with Department Manual Section 1/140.30 and 3/220.50, he/she shall
discuss further processing of the survey with the League prior to its dissemination.

SECTION 3.0 ON THE JOB
ARTICLE 3.1 PERSONNEL FOLDERS
A. Review of Personnel Folder

An employee shall be entitled to review the contents of the employee's official
departmental personnel folder, including electronic files, in accordance with the
provisions of Government Code Section 3306.5.

B. Obtaining Copies of Documents in Personnel Folder

1. In all cases where an employee wishes to obtain copies of documents in the
employee's official departmental personnel folder, the employee shall adhere
to the procedure set forth below. The employee shall bear the cost of having
such copies made. Such cost shall be calculated pursuant to Administrative
Code Section 22.262.

2. Notwithstanding Paragraph 1 above, an employee shall be provided a copy
of documents, free of charge, before such documents are forwarded for
inclusion in the departmental personnel folder. Prior to forwarding documents
for inclusion in the departmental personnel folder, the employee shall sign the
documents indicating he/she is aware of such documents in accordance with
the provisions of Government Code Section 3305. The employee shall also
be provided a copy of the documents. If the employee refuses to sign a
document, the word "Refused" should be written by a supervisor, and the
date and supervisor's name should be noted on the document.

Note: This is intended to apply to documents such as the Standards Based
Assessment, commendations, etc. It is not intended to apply to documents
such as the Form General 41 that are completed for payroll, adjustments in
anniversary dates, vacation, etc., or notes and documents in support of such
changes. Any question as to an employee's entitlement to a copy of a
document free of charge shall be resolved by the Commanding Officer,
Personnel Division, whose decision shall be final.
3. Procedure:

a. The employee shall submit a written request to the Records Unit,
Personnel Division, indicating the specific documents to be copied and
the number of copies desired of each document. At the employee's
option, the employee may include a telephone number where the
employee can receive notification if it is determined the request will
take more than three working days to complete.

b. Records Unit personnel shall have a minimum of three working days
following receipt of the request to complete the work, but may require
a longer period of time if extensive copying is requested.

c. If an employee believes the request is of an emergency nature and
should be processed immediately, the employee shall state this in
writing. The Commanding Officer, Personnel Division, shall make the
final determination of whether or not the request is of an emergency
nature. In making such a determination, consideration shall be given
to the purpose or use of the copies requested, the availability of staff
to complete the request, and other work pending of a priority nature.

Notifications to Employee

If the Department receives a request for disclosure of records from an employee’s
personnel folder, the Department shall give the employee notice of the request
within seventy-two (72) hours of the Department's receipt of the request. This
notification requirement shall apply to, but is not limited to, requests by a
prosecuting agency made under the U.S. Supreme Court case in Brady vs.
Maryland.

ARTICLE 3.2 UNIFORM, MAINTENANCE AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE

A.

The City will provide a cash payment of:

$1,025 in July 2012;
$1,025 in July 2013; and
$1,025 in July 2014.

to eligible employees in the Unit. The payment will cover the cost of uniform
replacement, maintenance and other professional expenses.

When issued, the annual uniform allowance will be paid by separate check and shall
be applicable to the prior fiscal year.

To be eligible for this benefit, an employee must have successfully completed basic
recruit training.
Cc. The annual uniform allowance will not be paid to any officer graduating from the
Police Academy during the fiscal year for which a uniform allowance is to be paid.

D. Whenever an employee who has graduated from the Police Academy and is off
probation, leaves City service for any reason, the annual uniform allowance will be
prorated by 1/12 for each month of service with any time worked or paid in any
month qualifying for reimbursement.

E. During the fiscal year in which an employee is promoted to captain, such employee
may only receive one uniform allowance. An employee promoted to captain prior to
April 1 shall receive such allowance pursuant to the MOU for the Police Officers,
Captain and Above Representation Unit. An employee promoted to captain on or
after April 1 shall receive such allowance pursuant to this MOU.

F. This allowance shall be subject to both State and federal taxation which shall be
deducted from the separate check.

G. In December 2011, the City will provide a cash payment in the amount of $1,500 to
each employee of the Unit who was a sworn member of the Department on July 1,
2011, to cover the cost of firearms and equipment. This payment will be paid by
separate check and shall be subject to both state and federal taxation.

ARTICLE 3.3 NOTICE TO CORRECT DEFICIENCIES

This Article standardizes the Department's retention practices concerning the Notice to
Correct Deficiencies, Form General 78, for employees of this Unit and conforms with State
law and existing City of Los Angeles administrative practices.

Consistent with the Standard Based Assessment (SBA) performance model, a Notice to
Correct Deficiencies (NTCD) may be attached to the SBA for the corresponding evaluation
period. In such cases, the NTCD may be reviewed by oral boards or for advancement or
promotional purposes. If a NTCD is attached to a SBA, any subsequent document
indicating improvement shall also be attached to either the same SBA or a subsequent
SBA.

Note: If a SBA or a NTCD that is attached to a SBA is the subject of an open
grievance and the employee is engaged in a Civil Service promotional examination,
the employee may submit an Employee’s Report (Form 15.7) to the Commanding
Officer, Personnel Division, requesting that the SBA be temporarily removed from
the employee’s personnel folder until the conclusion of the examination process or
the grievance procedure, whichever comes first. The Commanding Officer,
Personnel Division, shall confirm with Employee Relations Group that the SBA or
NTCD is the subject of an open grievance before temporarily removing the SBA
from the employee’s personnel file.

-10-
ANTCD that has not been attached to a SBA for the corresponding evaluation period shall
not be available to oral boards or for advancement or promotional purposes. In such
cases, the NTCD shall be filed indefinitely in a file separate from the employee’s Personnel
Package at Personnel Division.

ARTICLE 3.4 A DRUG-FREE WORK PLACE

The responsibilities inherent in the law enforcement profession require officers to undergo
strict physical and psychological evaluations. Thorough pre-employment investigations into
every facet of a police applicant's background are conducted to ensure that the candidate's
profile is of an individual worthy of the public's trust. Once employed, those individuals who
fail to abide by the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics are disciplined or even terminated
when appropriate. All members of the Police Department must be willing to accept a
random urinalysis program as yet another test in which the police officer is held to a higher
standard than others in society.

An employee who voluntarily apprises the Department of an addiction or other use-related
problems caused by either a valid prescription prescribed for the employee (excluding
marijuana) or over-the-counter medication will be allowed to become involved in a
rehabilitation program. Assistance is available through most City health plans and the
Employee Assistance Program (Article 7.14). The Department will take steps necessary to
ensure that this disclosure and participation in rehabilitation by the employee is kept
confidential. The Department will cooperate with the employee’s participation in
rehabilitation by allowing the employee to utilize sick leave or other available discretionary
leave (i.e., accrued time off or vacation) as necessary.

As used in this Article, the term “voluntarily apprises the Department” shall mean that the
employee brought the matter to the attention of the Department:

. On his or her own initiative;
. At a point in time not in conjunction with a drug test and when no administrative
investigation has been initiated by the Department concerning the employee’s use of

prescription or over-the-counter medication; and

. That no acts or omissions by the employee and related to the use of prescription or
over-the-counter medication involves any criminality on the part of the employee.

ARTICLE 3.5 SUBSTANCE TESTS
Section 1 - General Prohibition and "For Cause" Testing

A. Illicit substance or drug abuse by members of the Department is unacceptable and
censurable conduct worthy of strong administrative action.

-11-
An employee may only be required to submit to a field sobriety examination, blood,
breath or urine test for the purposes of determining the presence of a narcotic, drug,
or alcohol when:

1.

The employee exhibits objective symptoms of being under the influence of
alcohol and/or a narcotic or drug; or

There is a reasonable and articulated suspicion that the employee has
ingested or absorbed by the body in any other manner an alcoholic
beverage, narcotic, or drug.

In the event of any such test, the employee shall be entitled to the following
protections and procedures:

1.

An employee of the same sex as the Unit member shall be responsible for
collection of any urine sample.

Sample collection shall be monitored in an atmosphere of privacy and dignity.

Sample collection shall be conducted in such a way as to ensure a tamper-
proof sample. In the event a sample has been tampered with or a seal
broken prior to the lab analysis, the sample shall be declared void and the
employee may be immediately retested.

Testing of any urine sample shall be by a two-stage process, with the second
stage analysis done only in the event of and to confirm a positive test result
from the first stage analysis of the sample.

Sample analysis will be conducted within ten days of receipt by Scientific
Investigation Division (SID), with notification of negative test results to be
forwarded via Department mail to the subject employee within fourteen days
of sample receipt by SID.

Employees who test positive for one or more drugs based upon the
confirmation test will be given an opportunity to have a portion of the sample
retested by a reputable chemical laboratory at City expense. The sample will
have been divided by a representative of SID and released to an authorized
agent of the laboratory.

The division of the sample will be done by SID prior to testing of the sample
by the Department. Both samples will be resealed by the SID employee who
does the division. The second sample, split from the original sample, will be
stored in Property Division until requested by the employee for outside
laboratory testing, at City expense.

-12-
7. If the outside laboratory reaches a different conclusion than SID after testing
the sample, a different reputable outside chemical laboratory will be
requested to test the sample a third time at City expense. The findings of the
third laboratory will be conclusive.

8. Based on the confirmation test, samples tested positive by the Department
for a drug(s) in the urine will be resealed by the SID chemist and booked at
Property Division. These samples will be maintained for a period of one year
in a refrigerated state.

9. The Department shall ensure that any non-sworn departmental personnel
involved in the handling or testing of samples shall not have any prior felony
convictions.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the Department shall also have
the discretion to order any sworn employee to submit only to a blood, breath or urine
test for the purposes of determining the presence of a narcotic, drug or alcohol ona
random basis (to the extent allowed by law). These tests will be conducted in the
manner set forth in Section 2 below.

The exercise of this discretion by the Department shall be deemed a term and
condition of such employee's employment and need not be supported by any
showing of cause.

If any employee is ordered to submit to these tests involuntarily, the evidence
obtained shall be used for administrative purposes only.

If any employee requests a representative prior to submitting to a substance test,
the employee shall be permitted to consult with a representative telephonically; and
the employee shall be permitted to have a representative present, provided that
such representative is able to arrive at the scene within two hours. If, while awaiting
a representative, the employee must relieve himself or herself, he or she must
provide a sample to be held by Department representatives pending the employee's
receipt of advice; provided, however, that such sample shall be returned
immediately to the employee without analysis in the event he or she chooses, after
advice, to "refuse" a test. Refusal to obey an order to submit to a test as defined in
Paragraph A of this Section may result in disciplinary action for insubordination up to
and including termination.

Section 2 - Police Officer Drug Testing Program

A.

Procedures
The Department Probationary Police Officer Drug Testing Program was developed

to ensure it is as effective, fair, accurate and unintrusive as possible. Consequently,
the following procedures will be implemented:

-13-
Probationary Employee Procedures

a.

All entry level probationary employees will be tested, on a random
basis, a maximum of six times during their probationary period.

All tenured employees will be tested, on a random basis, a maximum
of twice during their promotional period.

Probationary employees will only be tested twice unless their "testing
entity" is randomly selected.

Tenured Police Officer Procedures

a.

All tenured police officers will be tested, on a random basis, up to
three times a year.

The selection of test subjects will be conducted by computer without
human intervention, so that at least 100 tests are conducted every
week, in addition to the tests required by the Department of
Transportation and those tests administered to probationary police
Officers.

The computer selection program will ensure that at least one person is
randomly selected to be tested each week at every geographic Area,
Traffic Division, and Narcotics Division. The program will randomly
select at least one person to be tested every two weeks from
Metropolitan Division and Major Crimes and Vice Division. The
remainder of the Department's sworn personnel will be grouped by
their bureau of assignment and the program will randomly select at
least one person from each bureau grouping to be tested every
month.

The following shall apply to employees subject to testing in Paragraphs 1 and
2 above:

a.

The collection and maintenance of samples will be conducted by
trained professionals to prevent errors.

Analysis of samples will be completed by members of SID with state-
of-the-art equipment.

Test subjects will be allowed to have a positive confirmation test
sample retested by a reputable private laboratory.

-14-
Administration of the Drug Testing Program

Medical Liaison Section (MLS), Personnel Division, is the most appropriate
Department entity to administer the Police Officer Drug Testing Program for the
following reasons:

1. The program is a facet of the personnel function and therefore should fall
under the auspices of the Commanding Officer, Personnel Division.

2. The administration of the program will be carried out on a twenty-four-hours-
per-day, seven-days-a-week basis. This responsibility can best be fulfilled by
MLS personnel deployed during a Day Watch and "floating" PM/AM Watch.

3. Since officers will be tested from all geographical locations, the program
administration should be centrally located.

4. The collection of samples by MLS personnel, as opposed to some other
administrative or investigative unit, may help to diminish program resistance.

The Commanding Officer, Personnel Division, will be designated as the Drug
Testing Coordinator and the Officer-in-Charge, Medical Liaison Section, will
coordinate the daily activities of the program. The collection of samples and the
liaison between Personnel Division and test subjects will be assigned only to MLS
personnel.

Note: All persons associated with the administration of the Police Officer Drug
Testing Program will be apprised of the importance of maintaining the confidentiality
of urinalysis information. Any employee who breaches this trust will be dealt with
through the disciplinary process.

Test Population and Selection Process

Test subjects for this random urinalysis program will include all sworn personnel of
the rank of lieutenant or below.

1. Entry-Level Probationary Employees

Entry-level probationary employees will initially be selected for testing while
undergoing recruit officer training at the Academy. The second test will be
administered once the individual has graduated and has been assigned to
field duties. Additionally, all probationary police officers will be eligible for
unscheduled random selection and testing throughout their probationary
period.

-15-
The selection of officers for testing will occur on a random basis by utilizing
computer-generated random numbers programs written and operated by staff
members of Information Technology Division (ITD).

The sampling plan is designed to assure random selection of test subjects for
drug testing as well as confidentiality of the testing procedure. Two lists of
probationary officers will be generated by the computer through the
Personnel History System. One list will contain the names of all recruits
currently being trained in the Academy. The second list will contain the
names of all officers who have been placed in probationary field
assignments. Both lists will be ordered according to the social security
numbers rather than the names of the recruits since utilizing social security
numbers eliminates the bias that is often built into alphabetically-organized
listings.

Random numbers tables will be utilized to assign a confidential test
identification number to each recruit's name on the list of those currently
being trained in the Academy as well as on the list of those currently in
probationary field assignments. A listing of each recruit's name and the
recruit's confidential test identification number will be generated and
presented only to the staff of MLS.

Confidential test identification numbers will then be randomly selected by the
computer. The recruits whose names match those identification numbers will
then be tested for drugs. The computer will continue the selection of
confidential test identification numbers until all recruits have been tested once
during their training period in the Academy and once during their probationary
field assignment.

A second computer program will reflect the confidential test identification
numbers of all entry-level probationary police officers. On a random basis,
this program will select officers for testing throughout their probationary
period. Therefore, all officers will receive at least two urine tests for drugs,
and could be selected more times during their probationary period.

Tenured Police Officer Procedures

The selection of tenured police officers for testing will occur on a random
basis by utilizing a computer-generated random numbers program written by
members of ITD. The sampling plan is designed to assure random selection
of test subjects for drug testing as well as confidentiality of the testing
procedure. The list will be ordered according to the social security numbers
rather than the name of the concerned personnel since utilizing social
security numbers eliminates the bias that is often built into alphabetically-
organized listings.

-16-
Random numbers tables will be utilized to assign a confidential test
identification number to each police officer. A listing of each individual's name
and his/her confidential test identification number will be generated and
presented only to the staff of MLS.

Confidential test identification numbers will then be randomly selected by the
computer as described in Section 2.A.2 of these procedures. The personnel
whose names match those identification numbers will then be tested for
drugs. No police officer will be tested more than three times in one year. This
total number of tests per year will not exceed the total number of officers of
the rank of Lieutenant and below excluding probationers plus 30 percent.

Sample Collection

Medical Liaison Section sworn personnel will be responsible for the actual urine
collection process. When directed by the Drug Testing Coordinator, they will report
‘0 Training Division or an Area/division prior to the beginning of a specific watch to
est entry-level probationary officers. They will have a copy of a Department Drug
Monitoring Log which will list the names and corresponding serial numbers and
confidential test numbers of those officers to be tested that day.

At the test location, MLS personnel shall inform the Commanding Officer, or the
highest ranking officer present, of the reason for their presence. They will provide a
confidential list of those officers to be tested. A determination will be made as to the
availability of the officers. When a test subject is not working (regular day off,
vacation, etc.) or is unavailable (court attendance, booking of a suspect, etc.), MLS
personnel will ensure that the officer is tested upon the employee's return to the
work site. Only the highest ranking officer available will be aware of the name(s) of
he officer(s) to be tested upon return to the station.

The MLS employee will request that an officer of the rank of Sergeant | or Detective
Il or higher from the Area/division be assigned to the collection process. The
division/Area supervisor will be responsible for notifying the available officers of the
est and assuring that they immediately report to the MLS employee for processing.

Verification of test subject identification will be made through the presentation of
appropriate identification (Los Angeles Police Identification Card, California Driver's
License, etc.) by each subject.

 

An MLS employee of the same sex as the subject will accompany the subject to a
Department restroom facility. Once inside the restroom facility, the MLS employee
will provide the test subject with a Department-approved urine sample container.
The container will have affixed to it a label which reflects the test subject's
corresponding confidential test number. The subject will be directed/ordered to
provide a urine sample. The sample collection shall be monitored by the MLS
employee in an atmosphere of privacy and dignity.

-17-
Note: Refusal to obey the order may result in disciplinary action for insubordination
up to and including termination. Additionally, the Department will reserve the right to
require that a urine test be administered when the employee exhibits objective
symptoms of being under the influence of alcohol and/or a narcotic or drug or when
there is a reasonable and articulated suspicion that the employee has ingested or
absorbed in any other manner an alcoholic beverage, narcotic or drug.

Test subjects will be required to provide at least 50 cubic centimeters of urine for
testing purposes. Subjects who are initially unable to provide a sufficient quantity of
urine will be required to remain under the supervision of the MLS employee until a
sufficient quantity can be deposited. The MLS employee shall approve all overtime
worked due to urine sample collection.

All test subjects will be admonished that disciplinary action will be taken if a test
subject attempts to dilute or, in any way, tamper with a urine sample.

In the presence of the MLS employee, the subject will be required to place and
secure a lid on the urine sample container. The subject's right thumb print will then
be inked and rolled on a specially prepared gummed label by the MLS employee
who monitored the test. The subject will then affix the label to the urine sample
container. The container will then display the subject's confidential test identification
number and right thumb print for future identification purposes. Additionally, the MLS
employee will sign and date two evidence seals and affix them to the container and
lid in the presence of the test subject. This process will ensure a tamper-proof
sample.

In order to preserve the chain or continuity of evidence, the MLS employee
monitoring the collection sample will be responsible for the transportation of the
sample(s) and a copy of the Scientific Investigation Division Confidential Drug
Sample Report to SID for processing. During other than normal business hours, the
MLS employee responsible for the sample(s) will store them in a secure
environment in Property Division. The sample(s) will be delivered to SID by MLS
personnel. The confidential test identification number of each test subject will be
used instead of the employee's name on Department documents to ensure
confidentiality.

Testing of Urine

In order to preserve the chain of custody, urine samples will only be released to SID
personnel who will actually carry out the analysis. Medical Liaison Section
employees will provide SID with a Confidential Drug Sample Report with each
delivery of samples. Scientific Investigation Division personnel will complete the form
as they test each sample.

-18-
Samples collected under the Police Officer Drug Testing Program will undergo the
same two-stage testing system as currently utilized for police officer applicant
testing. As a minimum, the following seven classes of drugs will be screened and
confirmed by this process:

PCP

Cocaine Metabolites

Opiate Metabolites

Barbiturates

Amphetamines

Marijuana Metabolites

Benzodiazepines (Valium, Restoril, Ativan, Xanax, etc).

NOARON>

The Department uses an Immunoassay process to initially screen all urine samples
for drugs. If a sample tests positive, Gas Chromatography (GCMS) is used to
confirm the presence of the suspected drug(s).

Urine samples will be analyzed by SID within ten days after their receipt. Test results
will be forwarded to the Drug Testing Coordinator via the SID Confidential Drug
Sample Report for review. Samples that test negative (no drug in urine) will be
destroyed by the chemist conducting the test. Notification of the negative test results
will be made via Department mail from the Drug Testing Coordinator to the test
subject within 14 days of the sample collection.

Samples that test positive (drug in urine) based upon the confirmation test will be
resealed by the chemist and booked at Property Division. They will be maintained
for a period of one year in a refrigerated state. The commanding officer of the
subject testing positive will be notified immediately and will remove the officer from
field duties pending appropriate action.

Note: The Department uses the following screen test cut-off levels to determine
whether a confirmation test will be given. Any test, either screen or confirmation, that
fails to meet the below listed cut-off levels shall be considered a negative test.

Screen Confirmation

PCP 25 ng/ml 25 ng/ml
Cocaine Metabolites 150 ng/ml (benzoylecgonine) 100 ng/ml
Opiate Metabolites 2,000 ng/ml 2,000 ng/ml
(6-acetylmorphine) 10 ng/ml

Barbiturates 300 ng/ml 150 ng/ml
Amphetamines 500 ng/ml 250 ng/ml
Marijuana Metabolites 50 ng/ml 15 ng/ml
(delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid)

Benzodiazepines 300 ng/ml 150 ng/ml

ng/ml = nanograms per milliliter

-19-
F. Retest Process

Employees who test positive for one or more drugs will be given the opportunity to
have a portion of the sample retested by a reputable chemical laboratory at City
expense as provided in this Article. The sample will be divided by a representative of
SID and released to an authorized agent of the laboratory upon request by the
concerned employee.

The division of the sample will be done prior to the sample being tested by SID. Both
samples will be resealed by the SID employee who does the division. The second
sample, divided from the original sample, will be stored in Property Division until
requested by the employee for outside laboratory testing at the City's expense.

If the outside laboratory reaches a different conclusion from SID after testing the
sample, a different reputable outside laboratory will be requested to test the sample
a third time at City expense. The findings of the third laboratory will be conclusive.

SECTION 4.0 WORK SCHEDULES

ARTICLE 4.1 REGULAR HOURS; POSTING SCHEDULED DAYS OFF; AND
TIMEKEEPING PROCEDURES

Management and the League agree that Management has adopted the partial overtime
exemption of 29 United States Code (U.S.C.) §207(k) for employees entitled to receive
overtime pursuant to this MOU and that such adoption occurred in 1985.

A. Purpose, Term, and Limitations

1. The Flexible Work Schedule (FWS) Plan for sworn personnel consists of 12-
hour, 10-hour, and 9-hour work shifts in addition to the 8-hour shift that
existed prior to implementation of the FWS. In conjunction with one or more
of the aforementioned shifts under the FWS Plan, where necessary, shifts of
8 hours or less may be utilized for training, special events, or a partial-day
suspension and the like.

For field patrol assignments, the primary FWS shift is 12 hours. 10-hour
shifts may be used in a field patrol division as supplemental or overlap
shifts, but shall not be used as primary watches to replace the 12-hour
shifts.

For all other assignments, the primary FWS shift is 10 hours. A 9-hour or 8-

hour shift may be used for some assignments when agreed to by the affected
employees.

-20-
B.

Any permanent change in the start time of any shift, or the creation or
elimination of a watch, requires the written approval of the Employee
Relations Administrator, acting for the Chief of Police, and is subject to meet-
and-confer. A request for a permanent change in working hours or
elimination of a watch should be submitted on an Intradepartmental
Correspondence, Form 15.2, via the chain of command to the Employee
Relations Administrator. Each request shall include a specific mission-based
need and rationale along with supporting documentation. Justification for
such a change may include, but is not limited to: service to the community,
sustained change in calls for service, safe deployment, cross-over, emerging
crime trends, heightened threat levels, population shifts, and workloads.

The League agrees that Management has no obligation to meet and confer in
advance of discontinuing FWS. However, the Department agrees to notify the
League at least two DPs in advance of implementation of such a change in
order to allow the parties to discuss the proposed scheduling system and
meet and confer over the impact of that Management decision on Unit
members. Additionally, it shall be the sole discretion of Management to
modify the FWS. However, if the modifications involve changes in hours and
other terms and conditions of employment, Management shall meet and
confer with the League. Management will not discontinue a portion (one or
more Areas) of FWS while the remaining portion continues.

In the event of a decision to modify or discontinue the FWS, Management
agrees to notify affected sworn personnel one DP in advance. Notification
shall be made by the last Friday of the DP prior to the DP at the end of which
the FWS will be modified or discontinued. Under such circumstances, the
current change of watch policy for patrol and traffic division personnel shall
be reinstated if changed to accommodate the FWS.

All provisions of this MOU that are created solely for and specifically apply to
the FWS shall be null and void if the FWS is terminated. Should Management
provide additional benefits to employees in relation to the FWS, such
benefits, whether specified or a practice, shall not be continued unless
mutually agreed upon by Management and the League.

All provisions of this Article that are not inconsistent with the provisions of
Article 4.2 shall apply to detectives specified therein.

Work Hours

1.

Each employee shall normally be compensated for 160 hours in each 28-day
DP including holiday time, depending on the shift the employee is assigned to
work, and shall normally be entitled to regular days off.

-21-
Note: There may be occasions when an employee may not have used
benefit time and/or worked the required hours for the 160 hours of
compensation, due to leave without pay, suspension, etc., wherein the
employee may be compensated for less than 160 hours in each 28-day DP.

Each employee shall be in actual attendance on duty a minimum of 8, 9, 10,
or 12 hours per shift every scheduled workday, depending on the shift the
employee is assigned to work. Each shift shall constitute hours worked for
the purpose of computing regular days off and any benefits which accrue on
an hours-worked basis for each employee.

a.

For employees working the 8-hour shift, each employee will generally
be scheduled to work 19 days consisting of 8-hour shifts totaling 152
hours in a DP. Employees working the 8-hour shift shall have holidays
scheduled pursuant to days off in lieu of a holiday as specified on the
annual deployment calendar.

For employees working the 9-hour shift, each employee will generally
be scheduled to work 17 days consisting of 9-hour shifts totaling 153
hours in a DP. For timekeeping purposes, each employee assigned to
work a 9-hour shift shall be scheduled for 7 hours of holiday time each
DP.

For employees working the 10-hour shift, each employee will generally
be scheduled to work 15 days consisting of 10-hour shifts totaling 150
hours in a DP during the DPs with one scheduled holiday. It shall be
Management's discretion to determine the DPs during which an
employee must work 14 or 16 10-hour shifts. Employees working the
10-hour shift shall have holidays scheduled pursuant to days off in lieu
of a holiday as specified on the annual deployment calendar. For
timekeeping purposes, during any DP when an employee is scheduled
to work 14 or 15 days, the employee shall be scheduled for 10-hour
holidays.

For employees working the 12-hour shift, each employee will generally
be scheduled to work 13 days consisting of 12-hour shifts totaling 156
hours in a DP. For timekeeping purposes, each employee assigned to
work a 12-hour shift shall be scheduled for 4 hours of holiday time
each DP.

Note: Any detective or sergeant participating in the Supervisory
Cross-Training Program pursuant to Manual Section 3/763.68 shall
work the FWS of the entity to which he or she is loaned.

The parties recognize that as a result of changing shifts during the
year, an employee on the FWS may be slightly over or under the

-22-
number of holiday hours granted to employees who are not ona FWS.
Variations in the number of holiday hours based on changing shifts
are not grievable or arbitrable.

During any DP when holiday hours are to be scheduled for employees
working the 12- and 9-hour shifts, such hours shall be scheduled on the last
regularly scheduled day off.

During the term of this MOU, the “No Code 7” program in effect on the date
of implementation of this MOU shall be continued.

Normally, during the scheduling of days off, no employee assigned to a 12-
hour shift should be assigned to work more than four consecutive days, and
should not be assigned to less than two consecutive days off, unless
requested by the employee.

Employees assigned as dog handlers shall be entitled to 20 hours of on-duty
time or compensatory time at the rate of straight time per DP for the purpose
of feeding and care of a City-owned dog. An employee with the responsibility
for the feeding and care of more than one City-owned dog shall be entitled to
30 hours of on-duty time or compensatory time at the rate of straight time per
DP. This time shall count as hours worked for purposes of overtime
computation.

Modification of Watch Hours

1.

The below provisions regarding working hours do not preclude Management
from adopting different scheduling if workload or emerging crime problems
mandate such adjustments, provided the adjustments are within the hours as
specified herein. In preparing a DP work schedule, Management may assign
employees to work hours other than the employees’ regular watch hours for
prescheduled events such as training, special events (i.e., holiday gunfire
suppression details; Fiesta Broadway; holiday parades), community
meetings, and administrative meetings.

Following the posting of the DP work schedule, if it is necessary to adjust an
employee’s scheduled days off or day off in lieu of a holiday, it shall be the
employee’s option to work the assignment on an overtime basis or adjust
their work schedule. Any adjustment of scheduled days off or a day off in lieu
of a holiday requested by the employee is subject to Management approval.

Following the posting of the DP work schedule, Management may temporarily
adjust an employee’s start of watch, either earlier or later, by up to 3 hours
unless Management and the employee mutually agree to a greater
adjustment.

-23-
Exception: The limitation on the adjustment of work hours shall not apply to
Metropolitan Division; surveillance units; Special Investigation Section; Senior
Lead Officers (SLOs) and Narcotics Division personnel deployed as Mobile
Field Forces (MFFs); and personnel involved in the protection of dignitaries,
city officials or employees, or other reasonable tactical operations that must
be carried out on short notice.

Note: When employees are deployed as Mobile Field Forces (MFF) and are
required to respond to Area stations and then report to a MFF with a vehicle
or other equipment, unless already on duty, the beginning of the watch shall
be the time the employee leaves the Area station to respond to the MFF
location or staging area in a City vehicle.

Employees assigned to a FWS who appear in court outside or partially
outside a regularly scheduled work shift, and as a result do not receive
adequate rest, will be allowed to adjust their scheduled shift start time,
subject to the approval of the employee’s watch commander, so that all ora
portion of the court attendance is considered regular work hours and not
overtime. Such adjustments shall not be used for the purpose of avoiding
overtime compensation. Alternatively, at the discretion of the watch
commander, and after considering the impact on the division’s ability to
adequately deploy personnel and accomplish its mission, the employee may
be allowed to use compensatory time off, vacation hours or unpaid leave.

Note: Employees who work extended end-of-watch (overtime) and as a
result do not receive adequate rest, may have the following pre-scheduled
workday changed within the DP, subject to the approval of the employee’s
watch commander.

When an employee is assigned to temporarily work a shift of fewer hours
than his or her regular scheduled shift (such as being assigned to training),
the employee has the option of doing one of the following:

a. Upon completion of the shortened shift, immediately return to his or
her division and work the remaining hours on the same day.
Reasonable travel time (generally not to exceed 60 minutes) will be
allowed for the employee to return to the division of assignment. The
travel time shall be considered work time. Any questions regarding
unreasonable delays and hours worked shall be resolved by the
employee’s commanding officer.

b. Work the remaining time owed on a future date, within the same DP,
that is mutually agreed to by the concerned watch commander or
officer-in-charge. If there is no agreement, the watch commander or
officer-in-charge shall decide the date(s) and hours to be worked.

-24-
c. Use compensatory time off (CTO), vacation hours, or leave without
pay in lieu of working the remaining hours of the assigned workday.
Scheduled holiday hours shall not be used to offset absence from all
or a portion of a shift. All hours worked, holiday, or any other benefit
time used, shall total the compensated work period of 160 hours per
DP.

Exceptions to the provisions of this paragraph requested by an employee
shall be pre-approved by the concerned commanding officer.

Note: Generally, the employee shall notify the watch commander or officer-
in-charge of the option selected prior to the beginning of the DP in which the
temporary work shift is scheduled. If the employee cannot make the
notification prior to the start of the DP, notification shall be made no later than
the beginning of the earliest roll call (or equivalent) on the day of the
scheduled temporary work shift. If the employee does not notify the watch
commander or officer-in-charge as described above, the watch commander
or officer-in-charge reserves the right to select the date(s) within the DP for
the employee to work the remaining time owed and shall promptly notify the
employee of the date(s) and hours to be worked.

Posting of Deployment Period Work Schedules

Under normal circumstances, DP work schedules shall be posted by noon on the
Wednesday before the start of the DP.

Change of Shift, Rotation

1.

Generally, shift rotation shall be conducted so it is effective at the beginning
of a DP.

All change of shift requests shall be based upon the current change of watch
policy except as otherwise specified herein. When requesting a change of
shift, employees shall list those shifts desired, in order of preference. Choice
of shifts will be granted based on availability and then in the order of
preference listed by the employee. If more than one employee of the same
rank and paygrade requests a specific shift, and there are not enough
available positions on the desired shift, priority will be given to the employee
with the most time on his or her present shift. If both employees have the
same time on the shift, preference will be given to the employee whose
request was received first by Management. In case both requests were
received by Management at the same time, seniority as a sworn member of
the Department will prevail. Sergeants | shall rotate within their respective
ranks. Police Officers assigned to a basic car should rotate only within their
assigned basic car to ensure basic car integrity and continuity.

-25-
Exception: In order to effectively schedule for optimum coverage and with
consideration for the Ideal Basic Car plan, under the FWS, SLOs and
supervisors may not exclude a shift of choice. However, the commanding
officer of a geographic patrol division may allow the sergeant | with the most
seniority, based upon time as a sworn Department employee, to exclude a
shift of choice. The division commanding officer may assign employees from
one basic car to another to meet the needs of the division and the community
they serve.

At the discretion of the commanding officer, employees may be loaned to
another shift for no less than one DP to provide vacation relief as necessary
to maintain adequate coverage on all shifts. Attempts will be made to fill such
loans on a voluntary basis.

Requests for exceptions from rotation or a specific assignment as a result of
a bonafide emergency or hardship situation shall be considered on a case-
by-case basis. Any decision by the commanding officer shall be based on the
current needs of the division, and such decision shall not be a grievable or
arbitrable matter, but may be presented to the Dispute Resolution
Committee.

Should an employee be loaned to another shift to meet divisional needs,
including vacation relief, the loan period shall not be counted as time on the
original shift.

If an employee is activated to military duty exceeding one DP, the time of
military activation shall not be counted as time on the original shift. The
commanding officer may make an exception to this policy when it is in the
best interest of the Department, the division, or individual employee to do so.
Specialty assignments or units shall be exempt from the change of shift
rotation, and their hours shall be set by their commanding officer.

Note: Specialty assignments may include, but are not limited to, the
following: Vice, Special Enforcement Units, Special Problem Units, Gang
Intervention/Enforcement Teams, Subpoena Control Officers, complaint
officers, school and juvenile car officers, and special task forces.

Involuntary Reassignment (Bumping)

The “bumping” policy as specified in Section 3/222 of the 2005 Department Manual
shall remain in force during the term of this MOU.

Timekeeping Procedures

A record of regular duty hours and overtime hours worked shall be
maintained in accordance with Department procedures. Under no

-26-
circumstances shall hours worked be recorded or maintained in an informal
manner commonly known as white time or in a manner inconsistent with
established policies and procedures. To do so is considered misconduct.
Any employee maintaining such a system and any employee allowing his or
her hours worked to be maintained in an unauthorized manner may be
disciplined.

All payroll timekeeping for FWS shall be by the “positive” timekeeping method
(i.e., hour-for-hour), as set forth in Appendix F.

This system shall be used to track all hours worked and leave time, including
absence without pay, bereavement, family illness, injury on duty, jury duty,
leave without pay, military leave with or without pay, preventive medicine,
relief from duty, sick time, suspension, overtime off (one and one-half time),
overtime (straight time), vacation, and workers’ compensation. All hours
worked, benefit hours and other absences shall be recorded on a daily basis.

In the event that leave time, suspensions or other absences result in an
employee being absent for a portion of a workday, the employee is obligated
to work the remaining portion of his/her workday on that date or another day
within the same DP.

Example: For an employee on the 12-hour shift, two days of suspension
would be equal to 16 hours and would require the employee to be off for one
workday (12 hours) plus four (4) hours of the next workday. Additionally, the
employee would be obligated to work eight hours of the second workday. A
similar example would apply to the 10-hour shift employees.

At the discretion of the concerned commanding officer, and after considering
the impact on the division’s ability to adequately deploy personnel and
accomplish its mission, the employee may use accumulated overtime or
vacation hours in lieu of working the remaining hours of his/her workday.
(See Appendix J for Time Conversion Chart).

Fiscal Operations Division must verify the actual hours of work of each
employee on the FWS immediately following the end of a DP. Validation of
timekeeping will be achieved by producing a record of the hours worked for
the involved employees and forwarding this record to each concerned
commanding officer for certification. Any discrepancies noted will require
payroll adjustments, whether the hours worked are over or under those
required to be worked during that specific DP as specified in Article 4.1. The
parties agree that Management may make corrections, as appropriate,
including the payment of any overtime hours not previously recorded and the
deduction of monies for any required hours of work which were not
performed. The parties further agree that so long as such adjustments are
identified in the first payroll period of the subsequent DP, Management may

-27-
make such adjustments without obtaining individual waivers from the affected
employees. Any such adjustments will be reflected in the record of the
following payday.

6. When an employee is expected to be absent for one or more DPs for
vacation, injured on duty, sick, family leave pursuant to state and federal law,
workers’ compensation or other no pay status, that employee’s work
schedule shall be converted to a five-day/40-hour work week at the beginning
of the DP following receipt of such information, or, if known prior to the DP in
which the absence will occur, at the beginning of the DP in which the
absence begins.

Violations of Timekeeping Procedures

Management agrees to take immediate action to correct any violations of
timekeeping procedures and to impose discipline as appropriate. The League
agrees that it will not encourage, finance, or in any way support and will actively
discourage litigation by any of its members against the City for violations of the
provisions of Paragraph G above so long as Management takes immediate
corrective action when such violations come to Management's attention.

ARTICLE 4.2 DETECTIVE HOURS

All provisions of Article 4.1 shall apply to detectives specified herein unless otherwise
modified by this Article.

A.

Purpose

Detective hours provide coverage on nights and weekends to effectively provide
detective investigative services of all kinds at all hours, seven days a week,
according to the needs of the Department and the community.

Definition of “Detective”

As used in this Article, “detective” shall mean sworn personnel assigned to detective
functions that are in the police officer rank, detective rank or sergeants participating
in the Supervisory Cross-Training Program as specified in Manual Section 3/763.68.
For the purpose of this Article, police officers assigned to school cars are not
“detectives” unless they are temporarily assigned to other detective functions.

Watches, Assignment, Staffing Levels
1. There are two primary watches for detectives: Day and PM. At the discretion
of Management, employees may be assigned from one detective function to

another on the same basic watch to meet the needs of the specific detective
function and the community. Except as otherwise provided for in Paragraph

-28-
D.

G of this Article, assignments to watches will be made by civil service rank
and paygrade and subject to maintaining the specific detective function’s
operational integrity/coverage.

Management shall specify and post the staffing of the Day and PM watches
by rank and paygrade pursuant to Paragraph D of Article 4.1. The first priority
in staffing determinations shall be officer safety. Staffing for all watches shall
include provisions for adequate supervision and investigative expertise.
Commanding officers shall ensure that daily staffing of PM watch includes a
minimum of one detective supervisor.

The staffing level of detectives in any division assigned to PM watch in any
given DP is determined by the commanding officer, who may adjust the
number as needed from DP to DP. However, the number of detectives
assigned to PM watch in any given DP should not be determined arbitrarily,
capriciously, or punitively, but should be determined with a realistic
expectation that such deployment will achieve reasonable operational
objectives. Management agrees that in each command where detectives are
assigned, the commanding officer will reasonably assess the need for the
number of PM watch detectives deployed each DP, with a view to avoid over-
deploying detectives on PM watch.

At the discretion of the commanding officer, employees may be loaned to
another watch to provide vacation, transfer, or other relief as necessary to
maintain adequate coverage on all watches.

Work Hours

1.

The below provisions regarding working hours do not preclude Management
from adopting different scheduling if workload or emerging crime problems
mandate such adjustments, provided the adjustments are within the hours as
specified herein for Day watch and PM watch start times.

Note: Hours of work are defined in Article 4.1.

Detectives assigned to Day watch are expected to have various start-of-
watch times. Day watch start-of-watch time will generally be 0600 to 0830
hours. Employees may request an earlier start-of-watch time with the
approval of the concerned commanding officer. PM watch start-of-watch
time will generally be 1700 hours.

Juvenile Car Officers shall be assigned to work a 10-hour shift.

-29-
Modification of Watch Hours, PM and Weekend Deployment

Stability of Hours: Management and the League recognize that particularly on PM
watch, adjusting a detective’s work hours after the posting of the work schedule
should only be done when reasonably necessary to accomplish operational needs,
but should not be done arbitrarily, capriciously, or punitively. Management may
consider individual requests for temporary exclusion from a change of work hours
based on an individual’s personal hardship or emergency.

Scheduled Holidays and Holiday Premiums

Detectives may be expected to provide at least minimal coverage for both Day and
PM watches on:

New Year’s Day Easter Memorial Day
Independence Day Labor Day Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve Christmas Day New Year’s Eve

Permanent PM Watch Positions

1. Commanding officers shall staff the PM watch with sufficient personnel to
ensure deployment of four detectives assigned to permanent PM watch
positions, whose start of watch times may be staggered. The Chief of
Detectives shall approve any increase or decrease in the deployment of
detectives assigned to permanent PM watch positions.

2. A person filling a permanent PM watch position may request to move to a
Day watch position in the same division whenever there is a vacancy on the
Day watch of the same rank and paygrade. Such reassignment may be
postponed for one DP to allow for the selection and assignment of a new
person to one of the permanent PM watch positions.

3. In cases where a permanent PM watch position is or is about to be vacant,
selection for the PM watch position should follow this order of preference:

a. Fill the position with a volunteer from within the division where the
vacancy exists.

b. If no acceptable volunteer is available, the position should be filled
through an open Department-wide selection process.

c. If no acceptable candidate is selected from the selection process, a
detective will be reassigned to the PM watch on the basis of seniority,
with the senior ranking officers given preference of watch. Provided,
however, that the concerned commanding officer is under no

-30-
obligation to fill a permanent PM watch position by permanent
reassignment of a person from the Day watch based on seniority.

The commanding officer or officer-in-charge shall maintain watch
seniority information that will be made available to detective
personnel. “Seniority” shall mean time in grade and shall be applied to
those in the division who have the civil service rank and paygrade
eligible to work the assignment. Except for homicide and specialty
assignments, when selecting on the basis of seniority, Management
may only exclude individuals based on personal hardship or an
emergency situation.

4. Acommanding officer may move or not move a person from a permanent PM
watch position when it is in the best interest of the Department, the division,
or the employee to do so. The employee shall be advised of the need for
such action. Any dispute shall be resolved by the Dispute Resolution
Committee.

5. At the discretion of the commanding officer, employees may be loaned to
another watch to provide vacation, transfer, or other relief as necessary to
maintain adequate coverage on all watches.

H. Request for Change of Watch

A detective may request a change of watch by submitting an Employee’s Report,
Form 15.7, to the commanding officer or officer-in-charge of the detective section,
no later than noon the third Monday of the DP. Such requests shall include the
employee’s choice of watch, including assignment preferences and any shift
preference pursuant to Paragraph E of this Article and Paragraph E.4 of Article 4.1.

I. Specialized Detective Assignments

A special Bureau or City detective assignment may be created to work primarily
between 1800 and 0600 hours to offer special investigative services or to help
reduce the need to deploy PM watch detectives in certain areas. Such an
assignment will be instituted and administered only by a commanding officer of
Bureau level or higher.

ARTICLE 4.3 SPECIAL EVENTS
Each employee assigned to work a special event shall have the employee's work hours
established by the guidelines provided in this Article unless the employee is specifically

directed by a supervisor to perform work before or after the special event. In those
instances, start and end of watch shall be determined by the involved supervisor(s).

-31-
Start of Watch. Unless otherwise specified, start of watch is the time and at the
location specified for roll call as designated for the particular special event, whether
or not the employee is required to be in uniform. If the employee is to report in
uniform, the employee may choose to take the uniform home, dress at home and
report directly to the special event, or stop by the employee's work place, dress in
uniform, and from there report to the special event.

Early Report. When an employee is required to report to a specific supervisor or
location prior to roll call, start of watch shall be the time the employee reports to the
supervisor or location.

Equipment Required. When an employee is required to bring specified equipment,
start of watch is generally when the employee checks out the required equipment at
a work place.

Note: Equipment provided at the event is not considered "required" for the purpose
of determining start of watch. Additionally, an employee required to obtain
equipment may not be the same employee who is required to return such
equipment, e.g., the employee who obtained the equipment is held over to complete
a booking and reports, and a supervisor designates another employee to return the
equipment to a specific location.

Exception: Employees are required to bring a Department radio to the event and
will be supplied with fresh batteries at the event. In this case, the employee may
elect to take the Department radio home after the employee's last shift and report
directly to the special event. Start of watch would either be roll call or early report as
specified.

Vehicle Required. When an employee, not assigned a take-home vehicle, is
required to bring a Department vehicle to a special event, start of watch is generally
when the employee checks out the vehicle.

Note: If an employee is required to bring a vehicle and provides transportation to
and/or from the special event for employees not required to bring a vehicle, the
employee required to bring and/or return the vehicle is the only one entitled to start
or end of watch when the vehicle is checked out or in. Start of watch for the
remaining employees will be roll call or early report as specified for the individual
assignment and end of watch will be at the special event.

Exception: When vehicles are not required for the special event, uniform personnel
may car pool in patrol vehicles, if available, and detective personnel may car pool in
plain cars or other vehicles assigned to detective personnel, if available. Employees
doing so shall not be considered on duty for timekeeping purposes as a result of
driving to or from the event.

-32-
End of Watch. At the end of the special event, an employee's end of watch will
generally be determined as follows (whether part of a regular work day or as
overtime):

1. At the special event if the employee is not required to return equipment
and/or a vehicle; or,

2. Generally at the time equipment and/or a vehicle is returned to the
designated location; or,

3. When the employee completes other required duties such as arrest, booking,
reports, etc.

Note: If the special event ends prior to the employee having worked the number of
hours that constitutes a working day (shift) for the employee, the employee has the
option of doing one of the following:

a. Upon completion of the shortened shift, immediately return to his or
her division and work the remaining hours on the same day.
Reasonable travel time (generally not to exceed 60 minutes) will be
allowed for the employee to return to the division of assignment. The
travel time shall be considered work time. Any questions regarding
unreasonable delays and hours worked shall be resolved by the
employee’s commanding officer.

b. Work the remaining time owed on a future date, within the same DP,
that is mutually agreed to by the concerned watch commander or
officer-in-charge. If there is no agreement, the watch commander or
officer-in-charge shall decide the date(s) and hours to be worked.

Cc. Use compensatory time off (CTO), vacation hours, or leave without
pay in lieu of working the remaining hours of the assigned workday.
Scheduled holiday hours shall not be used to offset absence from all
or a portion of a shift. All hours worked, holiday, or any other benefit
time used, shall total the compensated work period of 160 hours per
DP.

Exceptions to the provisions of this paragraph requested by an employee shall be
pre-approved by the concerned commanding officer.

Note: Generally, the employee shall notify the watch commander or officer-in-
charge of the option selected prior to the beginning of the DP in which the special
event is scheduled. If the employee cannot make the notification prior to the start of
the DP, notification shall be made no later than the beginning of the earliest roll call
(or equivalent) on the day of the scheduled special event. If the employee does not
notify the watch commander of officer-in-charge as described above, the watch

-33-
commander or officer-in-charge reserves the right to select the date(s) within the DP
for the employee to work the remaining time owed and shall promptly notify the
employee of the date(s) and hours to be worked.

F. The Department agrees to make a reasonable effort to ensure that employees on
fixed post assignments during special events have an opportunity to take a break to
attend to their personal needs. Any such break must be approved by a supervisor
prior to taking the break.

ARTICLE 4.4 TIME OFF FOR ORAL AND WRITTEN PROMOTIONAL
EXAMINATIONS

Employees shall be granted reasonable time off with pay for the purpose of taking oral
promotional examinations (including advanced paygrade selection) when such
examinations are given by the City and scheduled during the employee's normal working
period; provided, however, that each employee entitled to such time off with pay shall give
reasonable advance notice to the employee's supervisor. Such time off with pay may
include travel time. Under no circumstances shall employees be granted overtime or
adjusted time for participating in an oral promotional process or travel time related thereto
which occurs prior to or after an employee's regular work schedule. If an employee’s
participation in multiple advanced paygrade selections becomes excessive during a given
period of time and is negatively impacting the work of the unit or section to which the
employee is assigned, management may deny on-duty time for such participation.
Management may allow the employee to use accrued compensatory time or vacation leave
or may require that the employee adjust his or her schedule for that day in order to work the
required number of hours.

Note: An employee’s participation in advanced paygrade selections is deemed excessive if
participation in the selection process exceeds six times in a four-week period. If extensive
amounts of time during on-duty hours are required, the employee’s participation may be
deemed excessive without regard to the number of processes involved. In this
circumstance, the Employee Relations Administrator shall make the final determination as
to whether or not the employee’s participation is excessive.

Management agrees that any employee covered by this MOU, who may be assigned to
work on a day that a written promotional examination is administered by the Personnel
Department, and for which an employee has applied, shall be given priority in the
scheduling of days off for that day. In the event that Management is unable, due to
deployment needs, to accommodate the requests of all employees who applied to take a
written promotional examination, it is the responsibility of each employee not
accommodated to arrange with the Personnel Department for a delayed administration of
the examination.

-34-
SECTION 5.0 COMPENSATION
ARTICLE 5.1 SALARIES

The salaries and longevity payments shown in the Appendices listed below will be
operative on the following dates:

Appendices A-1 through 3 July 1, 2011
Appendices B-1 through 3 September 1, 2011
Appendices C-1 through 3 July 1, 2012
Appendices D-1 through 3 January 1, 2013
Appendices E-1 through 3 July 1, 2013
Appendices F-1 through 3 November 1, 2013
Appendices G-1 through 3 March 1, 2014
ARTICLE 5.2 CONTINUANCE OF LONGEVITY PAY

Notwithstanding Section 4.161 of the Los Angeles Administrative Code, a Police Officer will
be allowed to continue to receive longevity pay for a period of six months following an initial
notice of unsatisfactory service. If during the six-month period the Police Officer does not
achieve a satisfactory standard of service, the Chief of Police shall certify to the City
Controller that the employee’s service has been unsatisfactory, and the payment of
longevity pay for the employee will cease until such time as the Chief of Police again
certifies that the employee has achieved a satisfactory standard of service.

ARTICLE 5.3 HAZARD AND SPECIAL PAY
Hazard and special pay are specified in Appendix |.
ARTICLE 5.4 UNIFORM FIELD OFFICER INCENTIVE

A. A Uniform Field Officer Incentive of 3% (three percent) of regular salary (not pension
based) shall be paid to each eligible officer.

B. Eligibility
1. Except as modified in Paragraph 2 below, an "eligible officer" is any
employee in this Unit, during an applicable pay period, who has been
assigned to a division or other organizational component which works in the
field in uniform.
"Eligible officer" includes, but is not limited to:
a. Employees assigned to patrol

e Probationary Police Officers |
e Administrative Lieutenants

-35-
> argpaog

Complaint Unit Sergeants

Assistant to Administrative Lieutenant (Sergeant |)

Patrol Police Officers II/III (including desk and kit room)

Field Training Officer Coordinator (Police Officer)

Complaint Unit Police Officers

Uniformed officers working a School Car

Uniformed officers assigned to a Juvenile Car

Uniformed officers assigned to a Prostitution Enforcement
Detail (PED), Bicycle Detail, Beach Detail, or other similar
detail

e Uniformed officers assigned to the Specialized Collision
Investigation Detail

Metropolitan Division

Traffic Enforcement and collision investigation (includes traffic desk)
Commercial and Noise Enforcement details

Special Enforcement Unit (SEU) officers (excluding detectives)

Air Support Division Tactical Flight Officers

Officer loaned to Field Enforcement Section, Narcotics Division, for six
DPs or less who wear uniforms exclusively

Other officers found by Management to be eligible for the incentive
with the concurrence of the League.

Exception: An employee in the rank and paygrades or a successor rank and
paygrade of Detective |, II or Ill, is eligible to receive the incentive subject to
the provisions of Paragraph 4 below.

"Field" refers to enforcement activity or other activity involving citizen contact.

Some of those not eligible for the Uniform Field Officer Incentive are:

a.

Cc.

Officers voluntarily loaned for a period in excess of two DPs pursuant
to Article 5.4(B)(3) (except as noted in 1.g. above)

Any detective assignment, including detective trainees (except
juvenile car officers as noted above), SEU detectives, and detectives
assigned to traffic investigations

Officers assigned to Area functions including, but not limited to:
e Adjutant
Vice (other than PED)
Community Relations
Analytical Supervisor
Sergeants and Police Officers assigned as Project Officers
Sergeants and Police Officers assigned to the Training Unit

-36-
e Facilities/Trustee Coordinators
e Reserve Officer Coordinators

d. Chief Tactical Flight Officer, Air Support Division

An otherwise eligible officer, who is voluntarily loaned to a division or other
organizational component that is not covered by the incentive, shall continue
to receive the incentive for two DPs. The incentive shall not thereafter be
paid until the officer resumes duties covered by the incentive.

Note: An officer is not considered to have resumed duties covered by this
incentive because the officer’s loan is interrupted and he or she is briefly
returned to his or her regular assignment and the loan is expected to resume.
Should the officer's loan be interrupted for more than a brief period (more
than one DP), the officer would qualify to again receive the uniform incentive,
which will be retroactive to the time of his or her return to the regular
assignment. This would not apply to a loan that ends and the officer returns
to his or her regular assignment.

An otherwise eligible officer, who is involuntarily loaned to a division or other
organizational component that is not covered by the incentive, shall continue
to receive the incentive for a maximum of six DP’s. Following the six-DP
loan, the officer will either be returned to his/her prior assignment in order to
maintain the bonus, or the officer may choose to remain on loan with the
understanding that he/she will no longer receive the bonus for the remainder
of the loan.

 

Any employee in this Unit who is loaned for longer than two DPs to a division
or other organizational component qualified for the Uniform Field Officer
Incentive shall receive the incentive until the loan is terminated and the
employee returns to a nonqualifying assignment.

Paragraph 5 above shall not apply to officers who are loaned to Field
Enforcement Section, Narcotics Division, for six or less DPs and who work
exclusively in uniform.

Cc. Payment

1.

This incentive shall be paid on a biweekly basis for the time during which an
employee was eligible. Such time shall include vacation, compensatory time,
sick time and any paid leave during which the employee was eligible as the
result of an assignment.

Any employee who believes he or she is eligible for the Uniform Field Officer

Incentive and who is not receiving it shall make written notification of this fact
to his or her commanding officer on an Employee Report, Form 15.7, within

-37-
ARTICLE 5.5

A.

20 days of the time the employee became aware that he/she was not
receiving this bonus. The commanding officer shall take appropriate
corrective action if it is determined that the employee is eligible to receive the
incentive and it is not being received. If the employee is not eligible to receive
the incentive, he or she shall be so advised. Failure to provide such written
notice within the 20 days shall constitute a waiver of back pay for this bonus
and the employee, if eligible, shall only receive the incentive from the date of
written notification to the concerned commanding officer.

DETECTIVE INCENTIVE

A Detective Incentive of 1% (one percent) of regular pay (not pension based) shall
be paid to each eligible detective.

Eligibility

1.

Except as modified in Paragraph 2 below, an "eligible detective" is any
Detective I, Il or Ill, who, during an applicable pay period, is assigned to an
investigative entity where his/her primary duty assignment consists of
criminal investigations.

Exception: A Police Officer II or III who is loaned from a patrol assignment
where he/she is receiving a Uniform Field Officer Incentive to perform duties
in a detective investigation assignment, shall receive the 1% (one percent)
Detective Incentive after two DPs, and at such time the Uniform Field Officer
Incentive will cease to be paid.

Note: Questions as to the eligibility of a particular employee shall be
resolved by the Employee Relations Administrator, the CAO, and the League.

An otherwise eligible detective, who is voluntarily loaned to a division or other
organizational component that is not covered by the incentive, shall continue
to receive the incentive for two DPs. The incentive shall not thereafter be
paid until the detective resumes duties covered by the incentive.

Note: A detective is not considered to have resumed duties covered by this
incentive because the detective’s loan is interrupted and he or she is briefly
returned to his or her regular assignment and the loan is expected to resume.
Should the detective’s loan be interrupted for more than a brief period (more
than one DP), the detective would qualify to again receive the incentive,
which will be retroactive to the time of his or her return to the regular
assignment. This would not apply to a loan that ends and the detective
returns to his or her regular assignment.

An otherwise eligible detective, who is involuntarily loaned to a division or
other organizational component that is not covered by the incentive, shall

- 38-
continue to receive the incentive for a maximum of six DP’s. Following the
six-DP loan, the detective will either be returned to his/her prior assignment in
order to maintain the bonus, or the detective may choose to remain on loan
with the understanding that he/she will no longer receive the bonus for the
remainder of the loan.

4. Any detective who is loaned for longer than two DPs to a division or
organizational component qualified for this incentive shall receive the
incentive until the loan is terminated and the employee returns to a
nonqualifying assignment.

Cc. Payment

1. This incentive shall be paid on a biweekly basis for the time during which an
employee was eligible. Such time shall include vacation, compensatory time,
sick time and any paid leave during which the employee was eligible as the
result of an assignment.

2. Any employee who believes he or she is eligible for the incentive and who is
not receiving it shall make written notification of this fact to his or her
commanding officer on an Employee Report, Form 15.7, within 20 days of
the time the employee became aware that he/she was not receiving this
bonus. The commanding officer shall take appropriate corrective action if itis
determined that the employee is eligible to receive the incentive and it is not
being received. If the employee is not eligible to receive the incentive, he or
she shall be so advised. Failure to provide such written notice within the 20
days shall constitute a waiver of back pay for this bonus and the employee, if
eligible, shall only receive the incentive from the date of written notification to
the concerned commanding officer.

ARTICLE 5.6 MARKSMANSHIP BONUS

A. Management shall pay the bonus indicated below to employees who meet the
criteria established by the Los Angeles Police Department for each of the listed
levels of shooting expertise:

Marksman $4.00 biweekly

Sharpshooter $8.00 biweekly

Expert $16.00 biweekly

Distinguished Expert $32.00 biweekly

B. Compensation will be paid beginning with the first full payroll period of the month

following the date of qualification and shall continue for 26 biweekly pay periods.
After that period, the employee shall be allowed to requalify and receive the
appropriate compensation accordingly. Requalification at the same or higher level by
an employee at any time during the 26 biweekly pay periods shall entitle the

-39-
employee to continue to receive the appropriate compensation for that level for the
ensuing 26 biweekly pay periods. Employees will be compensated for only one level
of expertise.

ARTICLE 5.7 POST CERTIFICATE BONUS

A.

In addition to the salary and Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) bonus
set forth in the classification in the Salary Range Appendices of this MOU,
employees covered by this MOU who were, on June 30, 1996, and continue to be,
sworn members of the Police Department shall receive the following
educational/training compensation for POST certificate(s):

1. a. After an employee has completed ten years of service, a ten-dollar-
per-month bonus for successful completion and presentation of the
POST Intermediate Certificate; or,

b. After an employee has completed ten years of service, a fifteen-dollar-
per-month bonus for successful completion and presentation of the
POST Advanced Certificate.

2. A ten-dollar-per-month bonus for successful completion and presentation of
the POST Supervisory Certificate.

3. A ten-dollar-per-month bonus for successful completion and presentation of
the POST Management Certificate.

The POST bonus, as specified in Paragraph A.1., 2. or 3., of this Article, shall be
paid by separate check during the month of July of each future year and shall be
applicable to the prior fiscal year.

Any employee covered by this MOU who is hired after June 30, 1996, shall not be
eligible to receive any POST benefit under Paragraph A.1., 2. or 3., whether or not
such employee was previously a sworn member of the Police Department. At such
time as all current employees receiving the POST benefit under Paragraph A.1., 2.,
or 3. leave Police Department employment, this POST benefit shall cease.

The 3% (three percent) bonus for possession of a Basic POST Certificate will
continue through August 31, 2011.

Effective September 1, 2011, the 3% (three percent) bonus for possession of a
Basic POST Certificate will be eliminated, and 3% will be added to the regular salary
of each salary schedule in Appendix A-2 of this MOU.

Unit members who currently hold, or who successfully complete POST requirements

for and present an Intermediate POST Certificate, shall be paid 1% (one percent) of
regular salary.

-40-
G. Unit members who currently hold, or who successfully complete POST requirements
for and present an Advanced POST Certificate, shall be paid 2% (two percent) of
regular salary.

H. Unit members who currently hold, or who successfully complete POST requirements
for and present an Intermediate and an Advanced POST Certificate, shall be paid
3% (three percent) of regular salary.

Il. The date of issuance on the Intermediate and Advanced Certificates shall be the
operative date for the award of the bonus for payroll purposes, except when new
employees possess a POST Certificate upon employment, then the date for the
award of the bonus shall be the date of employment.

ARTICLE 5.8 PREMIUM PAY FOR BILINGUAL SKILLS

Notwithstanding Los Angeles Administrative Code Section 4.170, Unit members who are
not receiving premium pay for bilingual skills as of January 1, 2010, will no longer qualify to
receive premium pay for bilingual skills.

Unit members who are receiving premium pay for bilingual skills as of January 1, 2010, in
accordance with Los Angeles Administrative Code Section 4.170 will continue to receive
such pay as long as they are assigned to a position in which they are required to utilize
those bilingual skills on a regular basis.

Exception: Members at or above the regular pay of detective III are ineligible to
receive payment of a bilingual premium. This does not invalidate prior written
agreements by the parties.

ARTICLE 5.9 TEMPORARY HIGHER LEVEL POSITION

To assure the continuity of police services, employees from a lower civil service rank or
lower paygrade position may be temporarily deployed to a position normally assigned to
employees in a higher civil service rank or paygrade for a period of time not to exceed 168
consecutive calendar days (6 DPs). The 6-DP limitation on assignment to a temporary
higher level position may be extended on a case-by-case basis upon the express approval
of the Employee Relations Administrator.

A. Compensation

The employees so assigned shall continue to receive compensation at the salary
level held prior to the temporary assignment for the first 56 days (2 DPs). At the
conclusion of the initial 56-day period, employees who continue to be assigned to
the temporary assignment shall receive additional compensation of 2.75% of his/her
regular base pay for each day so assigned. Such compensation shall not be
pension based.

-41-
B. Reasons for Higher Level Assignment

Temporary assignments as specified in this Article may be authorized by
Management to fill vacancies which may exist for the following reasons:

1. A position is permanently vacant and is scheduled to be filled, but a period of
time is required to complete the selection and appointment process;

2. A position is temporarily vacant because the assigned employee is on loan or
on an approved leave.

Cc. Management Discretion

Management agrees that it is not the intent to use temporary pay assignments to
circumvent the normal promotion or appointment process. In this regard,
Management shall make a reasonable effort to fill vacancies in an expeditious
manner. However, for the purpose of this Article, it is understood that whether a
vacancy is to be temporarily filled shall be determined at the sole discretion of
Management. In this same regard, nothing contained in this Article shall be
construed or interpreted as requiring Management to temporarily fill a vacancy.

D. Limitations

1. No employee shall be temporarily deployed to a position more than one rank
above that employee’s rank.

2. Unless an employee receives a permanent appointment to the higher level
position, such employee shall be returned to his/her original position at the
conclusion of the temporary assignment.

3. An employee who accepts a temporary higher level position, but refuses
the additional compensation provided for under this Article, shall forfeit the
right to grieve the compensation loss.

4. The provisions of this Article are appealable to the Dispute Resolution
Committee and are not grievable.

5.10 SALARY OVERPAYMENTS

In the event a Unit member is erroneously overpaid by the City, repayment must comply
with California State law.

-42-
SECTION 6.0 OVERTIME

ARTICLE 6.1 OVERTIME PROVISIONS

A.

Authorization for overtime work shall be secured from supervisory personnel
delegated that responsibility by the Chief of Police prior to such work. Credit for
overtime worked without prior approval must be authorized by command level
personnel delegated this specific responsibility by the Chief of Police.

All hours or portions thereof worked in excess of the FWS work hours (i.e., either
eight, nine, ten, or twelve hours per day), shall be overtime including hours worked
by an employee when on a regular day off, hours off in lieu of a holiday or vacation
day. Supervisors are obligated to ensure that hours of work are properly recorded
and employees are compensated for all hours of actual work.

If the start of an employee's regularly scheduled duty day falls within eight hours of
the previous regularly scheduled duty day (turnaround time), the employee shall
be compensated at the overtime rate for those regularly scheduled duty hours or
portions thereof falling within that eight-hour period. Time-and-one-half turnaround
time shall be submitted as straight time equal to one half of the hours falling within
the eight-hour period of the previous regularly scheduled duty day.

Example: An employee’s regular end of watch is midnight but the employee works
two hours of overtime and does not go home until 0200 hours. The employee is
scheduled to return to work at 0600 hours. The two hours of extended end-of-watch
overtime is not germane. The employee is scheduled to return to work within eight
hours of the regularly scheduled end of watch (2400 hours). The turnaround period
would be defined as the period from 0600 hours when the employee was required to
report and 0800 hours, which would be eight hours after the previous regular end of
watch.

The employee will be paid regular wages for the two-hour-turnaround period by
virtue of the fact that this is scheduled as a regular workday. The additional half-time
compensation would be compensated via an Overtime Report requesting
compensation for one-half of the turnaround period (1/2 of 2.0 hours = 1.0 hour) at
the straight-time rate.

Compensation for overtime shall be at the discretion of the Chief of Police by cash
payment or by time off at the time-and-a-half rate of compensation for cash payment
or one and one-half hours for each hour or portions thereof of overtime worked if
time off is authorized.

Overtime while on a vacation day shall be limited to Court overtime as defined in
Article 6.3, duty-related medical examinations as provided for in Article 6.9, a
Department mobilization, or such other circumstances as designated by the Chief of
Police.

- 43 -
The method of computing the hourly rate of compensation for purposes of overtime
payment shall be to divide the employee's biweekly pay, including all types of salary
compensation except overtime, by 80.

Overtime shall be hours or portions thereof, calculated in units of one-tenth (.1) hour
consisting of a full six-minute period worked in excess of the normal work day or in
excess of the total number of hours included in regularly scheduled duty days during
a DP.

For the purpose of Sections 1300 through 1630 of the City Charter, an employee's
credit for overtime work shall be reduced:

1. By any period of time off with pay which the employee shall have taken for
any such overtime work, and

2. By any period of time which the Board of Pension Commissioners, for any
such overtime work for which the employee shall have received a cash
payment, shall have credited as part of such employee's years of aggregate
service pursuant to the provisions of Section1326 of the City Charter, or as
part of such employee's years of service pursuant to the provisions of
Sections1434 or 1626 of the City Charter.

If the League should require sworn witness(es) during an Arbitration Hearing whose
testimony is necessary to the proceeding, such witness(es) shall be compensated
as otherwise provided by this MOU.

An employee who is called in to work or for an administrative interview on a day off
shall be compensated at least four hours at the time-and-a-half rate. This provision
shall not apply to an employee who is called in while on off-duty standby pursuant to
Article 6.5.

Whenever an employee is required to telephonically report overtime, the employee
shall add one-tenth of an hour (0.1) to the amount of overtime reported.

Notwithstanding Paragraph 6.1.B. above, employees assigned to 9-, 10- or 12-hour
shifts who are scheduled to work a shorter shift for training or a special event, etc.,
such as an 8-hour or less shift, will generally be considered on overtime at the end
of the scheduled shorter shift.

Exception: Whenever the employee “owes” the City hours of work because the
employee has not worked the requisite amount during the DP (150, 152, 156, or 160
hours per DP as specified in Article 5. 4.1), such employee may be required to work
the additional hours owed the City and such additional time “owed” the City beyond
the scheduled work hours would not be considered overtime. (Also see Article 4.1.)

-44-
ARTICLE 6.1.1 DEFINITIONS

The following definitions apply to Articles 6.1.2, 6.1.3, 6.2 and 6.2.1 herein:

A.

FLSA: As used herein, "FLSA" refers to the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29
U.S.C. §§201-219 and the Portal to Portal Act of 1947, 29 U.S.C. §§251-262.

Overtime: As used herein, unless otherwise indicated, "overtime" refers to both
FLSA overtime and non-FLSA overtime.

FLSA Overtime: As used herein, "FLSA overtime" refers to hours actually worked
by asworn employee of the LAPD during a 28-day work period (deployment period)
which exceed 171 hours.

NON-FLSA Overtime: As used herein, “non-FLSA overtime” refers to the
compensation of a sworn employee with overtime pursuant to the current MOU for
any hours worked or activities which are not FLSA overtime hours.

CTO: As used herein, "CTO" refers to compensatory time off hours credited to a
sworn employee’s CTO time banks. CTO includes both FLSA CTO and non-FLSA
CTO hours unless otherwise indicated.

FLSA CTO: As used herein, "FLSA CTO" refers to hours actually worked by a
sworn employee during a 28-day work period which exceed 171 hours and which
are credited in CTO time banks as allowed in 29 U.S.C. §207(0).

NON-FLSA CTO: As used herein, “non-FLSA CTO” is defined as hours which are
credited to a CTO time bank for a sworn employee that are not compensation for
hours actually worked, as that term is defined by the FLSA, by an employee during a
28-day work period which exceed 171 hours.

Late Pay: As used herein, "Late Pay" and “late paid” refers to all hours of overtime
worked by a sworn employee which were compensated later than permitted by the
FLSA.

Cash Out: As used herein, the term “cash out” refers to the process by which
accrued CTO is debited from a sworn employee’s CTO time banks, and paid to the
sworn employee in a payroll check.

ARTICLE 6.1.2 CASH COMPENSATION OF OVERTIME

A.

It is understood that Management does not desire to compensate any FLSA
overtime hours worked by sworn employees in the form of CTO. Management will
use a method referred to as the FLSA Rule to ensure that all sworn employees
receive only cash compensation and no CTO for any FLSA overtime hours worked.

-45-
The FLSA Rule is a payroll procedure which compensates all overtime for
employees in cash once the specific FLSA threshold hours of overtime have been
entered into the payroll system in a DP.

The purpose of this Rule is to ensure that no FLSA CTO is accrued by employees.
There is no agreement to allow the payment of wages by way of FLSA CTO under
29 U.S.C. §207(0)(2) and there will be no FLSA CTO paid to employees. If CTO is
credited to an employee in excess of the FLSA Rule, Management shall cash out
those CTO hours upon the discovery of this fact.

B. Beginning on the date this MOU is approved, Management shall provide monetary
compensation for all overtime hours once an employee has accumulated eight-
hundred (800) hours of CTO. If an employee is credited with more than eight-
hundred (800) hours of CTO in the current payroll system, Management shall buy
back all CTO in excess of eight-hundred (800) hours for that employee within two
pay periods following the pay period in which the overage is discovered by
Management.

Unless the parties agree to extend the 800-hour CTO accumulation limit, this
provision will sunset on June 30, 2014. At that time, the CTO accumulation limit will
return to a maximum of 150 hours. The City will have the option of cashing out the
hours between 150 and 800, converting the time to another time bank, or a
combination of these two options.

ARTICLE 6.1.3 TIMELY PAYMENT OF OVERTIME

The parties agree that overtime will be compensated in accordance with 29 C.F.R..,
§778.106. Generally, this requires that overtime compensation earned in a particular work
period must be paid by the regular payday for the pay period in which the work period ends.
When the correct amount of overtime compensation cannot be determined until some time
after the end of the regular pay period, the overtime compensation will be paid as soon
after the regular pay period as is practicable. Payment may not be delayed for a period
longer than is reasonably necessary for the employer to compute and arrange for payment
of the amount due.

ARTICLE 6.2 ACCUMULATED OVERTIME
A. Hours prior to October 8, 1989 ("old" hours)

On October 7, 1989, each employee's overtime balance was recorded and frozen
subject to the following provisions:

1. An employee shall retain the right to use these "old" hours provided such

time off does not adversely impact the employee's unit or division as
determined by the commanding officer.

- 46 -
2.

Management may buy back any of these accumulated overtime hours in
excess of 496 hours, at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

Hours subsequent to date of MOU approval

Beginning at 0001 hours on the date this MOU is approved, all overtime hours
worked and credited to a sworn employee's account shall be subject to the following
provisions:

1.

To ensure that all FLSA overtime worked is compensated in cash, overtime
hours worked must be turned in pursuant to policies adopted by the
Department following meeting and conferring as required by law.

If the correct amount of overtime compensation cannot be determined by the
first payday following the DP in which the overtime was worked because the
employee did not submit the necessary and correct documentation showing
he hours worked, then so long as such payment is made no later than the
payday following the pay period during which the necessary and correct
documentation was received, such payment(s) shall not be considered to
have been delayed longer than is reasonably necessary pursuant to the
FLSA as interpreted by the Department of Labor at 29 C.F.R. §778.106.

Beginning on the date this MOU is approved, the Department may at its
discretion require employees to use CTO time in excess of 600 hours in order
‘o reduce the balance in an employee’s CTO bank. The Department shall
provide the employee with at least 24 hours notice prior to the start of the
shift for which the employee is required to use CTO time. The ability of the
Department to require employees to use CTO time in accordance with this
provision will sunset on June 30, 2014, unless specifically extended by the
parties.

 

If funds become available during the term of this MOU, Management may, in
its sole discretion, buy back any accumulated overtime hours in the new
bank. Prior to doing so, Management will give employees notice that it
intends to buy back such time.

Exception: Any employee who is prescheduled to use CTO in the DP
following the notice of Management's intent to buy back accumulated
overtime hours may have these hours exempt from being cashed out by
submitting an Employee’s Report, Form 15.7, to his or her commanding
officer within seven calendar days of the posting of scheduled days off
pursuant to Article 4.1(G) requesting that such hours be exempt from the
buyback. The commanding officer shall verify that the CTO is scheduled to
be used in the specified DP, and forward the Form 15.7 to Fiscal Operations
Division.

-47-
Whenever an employee resigns, retires, or is discharged from the Police
Department, the employee shall be paid in cash for all overtime
compensation due.

In case of the death of an employee, who, at the time of death has overtime
credits due, payment for such overtime credits shall be made to the estate or
any person legally entitled to such payment.

ARTICLE 6.2.1 FLSA AGREEMENT

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to be, nor does it constitute, an agreement for
allowing compensation of overtime with FLSA CTO pursuant to 29 U.S.C §207(0)(2) and no
such agreement exists or shall be implied from this Agreement.

ARTICLE 6.3

COURT TIME

A. The following provisions will apply for the compensation for Court, State or local
administrative board (hereinafter referred to as "Court") appearances outside of
normal duty hours of employees:

1.

Basic Compensation

An employee shall report to Court or remain on call, as directed by the
subpoena. If the employee is on call, it is the employee's responsibility to
notify the person designated by the employee's commanding officer of how
the employee can be reached. The employee does not need to remain at
home, but must be reachable by telephone, answering machine, answering
service or paging device. If the telephone number provided by the employee
is a paging device or an answering machine/service, or if the telephone is
answered by a person other than the employee, contact with such person,
device, machine or service shall constitute notification to the officer.

a. Whenever any police officer is required by a “be there” subpoena to
appear in Court, outside of his/her assigned work schedule, such
officer shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours overtime
compensation, plus hour-for-hour overtime compensation thereafter
for each additional hour of actual attendance with the same noontime
recess provisions as outlined in Paragraph A.1.b. If an officer has
separate “be there” subpoenas for morning and afternoon court
sessions, the two-hour minimum shall apply for each case.

b. If the employee is called into Court while on call, the employee shall
receive a minimum of two and one-half (2%) hours overtime
compensation and hour-per-hour overtime compensation thereafter
for each additional hour of actual attendance at Court with the
following noontime recess exceptions:

- 48 -
Length of Recess Amount of Compensation

 

45 minutes None

or less

Length of Recess Amount of Compensation
46 minutes All time over 46 minutes
or more (in six minute increments)

Note: An employee shall not receive the minimum of two hours for “be
here,” two and one-half hours for “on-call,” or hour-for-hour overtime
compensation for an appearance during the same time period.

If the employee remains on call and is not required to report to Court,
he employee shall receive two and one-half hours of overtime
compensation regardless of the length of time the employee is
required to remain on call. The employee will remain on call until 1600
hours of that day, unless notified earlier of the termination of the
employee's on-call status.

An employee who has a “be there” subpoena and whose status has
been changed to “on call” by the issuing attorney or the court, may
submit on-call overtime as provided for above if the subpoena control
coordinator was properly notified of the change in the employee’s
status. Failure to notify the subpoena control coordinator prior to or at
he commencement of the on-call status will waive the right to any on-
call compensation.

If an employee is notified that a “be-there” subpoena has been
cancelled less than 12 hours before the scheduled court appearance,
he employee shall receive two (2) hours of overtime compensation.
Notification means that the employee was reached in person or a
voicemail was left on the employee’s primary phone number.

 

The minimum of two and one-half hours overtime for on-call court
cannot be used more than once on the same court day,
regardless of the number of subpoenas for which an employee is on-
call or the number of different times during the day that an employee
is placed on call.

If there is a minimum for a court appearance, which can only apply if it
is the first court status of the day, this shall be exhausted prior to
beginning the on-call minimum overtime or actual hour-for-hour
attendance in court. Actual court attendance shall be hour-for-hour
after one or both of the minimum overtime provisions is exhausted.

- 49 -
Start and End of Court Overtime

Unless otherwise specified, start of overtime for a Court appearance is the
time for which the appearance is scheduled or the actual time of arrival of the
officer at the specified Court location, whichever is later. End of overtime for
a Court appearance generally is the time the officer is no longer needed at
the specific Court.

a. Evidence Required. When an employee is required to bring evidence
to Court, the start of overtime is generally when the employee checks
out the required evidence. When an employee is required to return
evidence not admitted into Court, end of overtime is generally at the
time and location where the evidence is returned.

b. Use of City Vehicle.

1. When an employee, not assigned a take-home vehicle, is
required to transport a witness(es) to a Court appearance, start
of overtime is generally when the employee checks out the
vehicle. If this employee also provides transportation for other
employees, the start and end of overtime for employees who
are provided transportation shall be the same as specified in
Article 4.3.D. of this MOU.

2. An employee may utilize a City vehicle to attend Court, subject
to the availability of vehicles and any restrictions on the use of
City vehicles imposed by the employee’s commanding officer.
The use of a City vehicle by off-duty employees to attend Court
is a privilege and no overtime shall be granted because an
employee elects to use a City vehicle.

Exception: If an employee remains at Court following the time when
the employee is no longer needed in Court, i.e., waiting for a second
employee to conclude testimony because they rode to Court together
in a City vehicle, the employee shall deduct the time spent waiting for
the other employee from the overtime submitted.

c. Any questions regarding unreasonable delays and hours worked shall
be resolved by the employee's commanding officer.

Exceptions to the “Be There” and “On Call” Minimum Compensation

Notwithstanding the above provisions regarding minimum compensation,
compensation in the following situations shall be as set forth below:

-50-
B.

ARTICLE 6.4

A.

For Court appearances or on call commencing two hours or less
before the employee's assigned watch, compensation shall be for the
actual time between the commencement of the Court appearance or
on call and the beginning of the employee's assigned watch with the
same noon recess provisions as outlined in Paragraph A.1.a. of this
Article.

For Court appearances commencing two hours or less after the
employee's assigned watch, compensation shall be for the actual time
between the end of the employee's assigned watch and the
termination of the Court appearance with the same noon recess
provisions as outlined in Paragraph A.1.a. of this Article.

For Court appearances or on call that begin during an employee's
assigned watch and terminate after the assigned watch,
compensation shall be for the actual time between the end of the
employee's assigned watch and the termination of the Court
appearance or on call with the same noon recess provisions as
outlined in Paragraph A.1.a. of this Article.

Note: In no event shall “on call” overtime compensation be more than
the minimum of two and one-half hours of overtime compensation.

For on-call commencing in the afternoon and the period of time on call
is less than two and one-half hours, compensation shall be for the
actual time between being placed on call and 1600 hours.

Overtime shall be compensated in accordance with the provisions of Article 6.1 of

this MOU.

Note: A detailed list of overtime examples is provided in Appendix K.

DMV TELEPHONIC HEARINGS

Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) Telephonic Hearings shall be governed by the
following provisions:

1.

On Duty

Employees subpoenaed for a DMV Telephonic Hearing which is scheduled
during the employee's working hours shall utilize a Department telephone to
call the DMV at the appointed hour.

Off Duty

-51-
B.

ARTICLE 6.5

A.

Employees subpoenaed for a DMV Telephonic Hearing which is
scheduled at a time when the employee is off duty may utilize a
Department telephone to call the DMV at the appointed time.
Alternatively, the employee may call from a private or mobile phone.

Employees participating in DMV Telephonic Hearings shall be entitled
to a minimum of two and one-half hours of overtime compensation
and hour-per-hour overtime compensation thereafter for actual
participation in the hearing with noontime recess provisions as per
Paragraph A.1.a. of Article 6.3.

There shall be no on-call compensation for DMV Telephonic Hearings.

Employees may not receive overtime compensation for DMV
Telephonic Hearings in conjunction with any other type of court
overtime compensation, unless the time spent in the DMV Telephonic
Hearing extends beyond the other compensated time. Employees
participating in DMV Telephonic Hearings while on call or while
actually in Court shall only be entitled to the overtime compensation
afforded by these activities. The exception to this rule is when the
DMV Hearing extends past the time when the overtime compensation
for the other court activity ceases. In such cases the employee shall
be entitled to hour-for-hour overtime compensation for the actual time
spent past the close of the other court activity.

Employees utilizing a private or mobile telephone to participate in a
DMV Telephonic Hearing shall be entitled to reimbursement for out-of-
pocket expenses excluding any roaming or long-distance charges
associated with the use of a mobile telephone.

Employees who utilize a Department telephone to participate in a
DMV Telephonic Hearing while off duty shall not be entitled to
overtime compensation for travel time spent reaching that telephone.

Overtime shall be compensated in accordance with provisions of Article 6.1 of this

OFF-DUTY STANDBY COMPENSATION

Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 4.1, 4.2, 6.1 and 6.2 of this MOU,
employees who are required by the Department to standby for holidays or weekends
will receive one hour of compensation at straight time for every six hours they are
required to standby. As used herein, "standby" means that the employee must be
reachable by telephone, answering service, answering machine or paging device
and must upon contact respond to a work location within a designated period of

-52-
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 4.1, 4.2, 6.1 and 6.2 of this MOU, officers,
sergeants, detectives, and lieutenants of the Metropolitan Division's K-9 Unit and
SWAT Team, and the Emergency Services Division’s Hazardous Devices Unit who
are required by the Department to standby on weekdays, shall be compensated as
described in Paragraph A above. Standby as used herein has the same definition as
used in Paragraph A above.

Cc. Time spent on duty during the period of standby will be deducted from the total time
the employee is on standby, not from the time accumulated as compensated
standby time.

Example: An employee is on weekend standby. The total time of standby is 60
hours. The employee is required to report for duty for six hours. The six hours are
subtracted from 60 hours leaving 54 hours of total standby time. Fifty-four is divided
by six, which equals nine hours of straight time compensation for standby. The
employee will also receive six hours of time-and-one-half overtime for responding to
the call out.

D. For purposes of computing the amount of compensation due for time spent on duty,
the time spent on duty will commence at the time the individual reports to the
designated place of assignment and will terminate at the time when the employee is
released from duty. Under no condition will time be allowed for travel.

E. Employees who are not placed on standby and are recalled to work during off hours
shall be compensated as described in Article 6.1. “Recall” is defined as being called
during off-duty hours and ordered to return to on-duty status.

Note: The term “on call” refers only to court overtime as defined in Department
Manual Section 3/212 and Article 6.3 of this MOU.

ARTICLE 6.6 OVERTIME COMPENSATION FOR MEETINGS OUTSIDE OF
NORMAL WORK HOURS

A. Department employees required to attend a meeting outside of normal work hours
shall receive a minimum of two hours overtime compensation and hour-per-hour
overtime compensation thereafter for each additional hour of attendance at a
meeting, to be compensated to the nearest tenth of an hour, with the following

exceptions:

1. Meetings commencing two hours or less before the employee's assigned
watch;

2. Meetings commencing two hours or less after the employee's assigned
watch;

-53-
3. Meetings that begin during an employee's assigned watch and terminate
after the assigned watch.

Compensation for the three exceptions listed above will be on an extended watch,
hour-per-hour basis, compensated to the nearest tenth of an hour.

Overtime shall be compensated in accordance with provisions of Article 6.1 of this
MOU.

ARTICLE 6.7 OVERTIME DURING SUSPENSION OR UNPAID LEAVE

A.

If an officer is required to appear for any of the below specified activities while on
suspension or unpaid leave, the officer shall receive hour-for-hour adjusted time for
that appearance by adhering to the procedures set forth in this Article.

1. Court as defined in Article 6.3.A; and,

2. An interview related to a personnel complaint, grievance or other
investigation.

The provisions of Paragraph A of this Article shall not apply to the preparation for or
attendance of an accused employee, an appellant or a grievant at a Board of Rights
or any other administrative hearing when the employee is the subject of the hearing.

Note: An accused or charged employee, appellant or grievant is not required to
attend a Board of Rights or administrative hearing and no overtime compensation
shall be granted for attendance at such hearing(s) regardless of the employee's duty
status.

An employee requesting adjusted time pursuant to this Article shall adhere to the
following:

1. During the first seven days of the employee's return to work, the employee
shall complete an Employee's Report, Form 15.7, giving the date, time,
location, and duration of the appearance and state the type of hearing or
interview. In case of a Court appearance, include the defendant's name(s),
the charge(s), and the case number. In cases other than a Court
appearance, include the name of the supervisor requiring such attendance.

2. Submit the Form 15.7 to a supervisor for approval.

3. Use the time within 90 days after returning to duty.

-54-
ARTICLE 6.8 COMPENSATION FOR FIREARMS QUALIFICATION

A.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 6.1, when an employee is required to
complete a firearms qualification during off-duty hours, such employee will receive
one and one-half hours of compensated time. Compensated time will be at the rate
of time-and-one-half. No additional payment will be made regardless of how long or
the number of times it may take the employee to complete the qualification in each
qualification period.

Management shall direct employees to qualify during on-duty hours whenever
possible. The above method of compensation shall only be used when the employee
can demonstrate to the employee's commanding officer that it was impractical to
complete the qualification during on-duty hours.

ARTICLE 6.9 COMPENSATION FOR MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS

A.

When duty-related follow-up medical examinations and treatment are scheduled by
the employee during an employee's regular tour of duty, Management will grant two
hours of on-duty time for the purpose of obtaining such examination and treatment.
Such time may be used for the actual examination, treatment or transportation to or
from such appointment. When the actual time necessary for such examination,
treatment or transportation during regular working hours exceeds two hours and the
employee is unable to complete his or her shift, the employee may request to use
accrued vacation leave, compensatory time or may request a leave without pay. As
used herein, "medical examinations and treatment" shall mean examinations and/or
treatment performed by, prescribed by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
physician, practitioner, or therapist designated in accordance with current Workers'
Compensation procedures (Workers' Compensation Appeals Board). Employees
shall notify Management of the dates and times of medical treatment and medical
examination appointments prior to the appointment so Management can determine if
it is feasible to grant the employee on-duty time for such appointment.

When Management determines that it is impracticable to schedule medical
examinations and treatment on duty, an employee, notwithstanding the provisions of
Articles 4.1, 4.2, 6.1, and 6.2, will receive two hours straight time compensation
regardless of the length of treatment. At the discretion of the commanding officer,
when an employee’s medical examination or treatment falls at the beginning or end
of a scheduled work assignment, an employee may be granted one hour of on-duty
time and one hour of straight time compensation for the same medical examination
and treatment.

Note: Failure to notify a supervisor of the dates and times of medical examinations
and/or treatment prior to the date of such appointments may be grounds for
considering the time spent at such appointment as being outside of regular working
hours or for denying overtime compensation pursuant to Paragraph A above.

-55-
Exception: When Management or its agent requires and schedules a medical
examination of the employee, the time, whether on or off duty, is not limited to two

hours.

Compensation will not be paid for:

1.

3.

4.

Medical examinations or treatment performed by someone other than a
licensed physician, practitioner, or therapist designated in accordance with
current Workers' Compensation procedures (Workers' Compensation
Appeals Board).

Medical examinations or treatment conducted while an employee is on
injured-on-duty (IOD) status, Workers' Compensation status, sick leave,
military leave, or unpaid leave. This includes the time required to obtain a
return to duty certification from a City physician.

Medical examination or treatment while an employee is hospitalized.

Off-duty emergency medical examinations or treatment.

When an employee has made a claim that an illness or injury is duty-related and it
has not yet been determined that it is duty-related, the employee shall follow the
provisions and procedures as outlined in Paragraphs A and B above, except that all
such medical examinations and/or treatment shall be off duty. All Overtime Reports
for such off-duty medical examinations and/or treatment shall be completed and
processed as follows:

1.

The employee shall include the below information in the "Description of
Activity" portion of the Overtime Report, Form 2.24.

a. Name of the physician, practitioner or therapist conducting such
examination and/or treatment.

b. Name of the supervisor notified of the date and time of the
examination and/or treatment and the date and time of such
notification.

c. "Pending IOD status" shall be written in the lower right-hand corner.

The employee shall submit the green copy of the Overtime Report for
supervisory approval and retain the yellow copy.

Following approval, the green copy of the Overtime Report shall be submitted
to the divisional timekeeper and shall be held until such time as a decision is
made as to the concerned employee's IOD status. Once a decision is made
as to the IOD status, the Overtime Reports shall be processed as follows:

-56-
If it is determined that the employee's illness or injury is duty-related,
Overtime Reports submitted pursuant to Paragraph C.1. shall be
processed and the employee compensated. Prior to the processing of
such reports, the timekeeper shall add the Worker's Compensation
number to each Overtime Report.

If it is determined that the employee's illness or injury is not duty-
related, the timekeeper shall write "Denied IOD" and the date of
notification of such duty status on all Overtime Reports completed
pursuant to Paragraph C.1. The green copy of the Overtime Report
shall be retained and no compensation shall be granted the employee.

4. Any of the following may be grounds for denial of compensation for such time
in the event the illness or injury is determined to be duty-related:

a.

ARTICLE 6.10

Failure to notify a supervisor of the dates and times of medical
examinations and/or treatment prior to the date of such examinations
and/or treatment; or,

Failure to include the information specified in Paragraph 1 above; or,

Failure to complete the Overtime Report(s) in a timely manner as
specified in Article 6.2.B.1.

SHOW-UP/NO WORK

Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 4.1 and 4.2, the parties recognize that the
Department may require additional staffing. The Department shall permit employees to
volunteer to work such additional shifts or portions of shifts when required.

When an employee is requested to work or volunteers for other than a regularly scheduled
work shift as indicated in the posted DP work schedule and reports to work and the
employee's services are not needed, the employee shall be entitled to a minimum of two
hours straight time either in time or cash at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

This provision does not apply to unusual occurrences, employees on weekend/holiday
standby, or for employees who have been assigned a take-home vehicle.

-57-
SECTION 7.0 BENEFITS

ARTICLE 7.1 VACATIONS AND VACATION PAY

A.

Each employee shall be entitled to 120 hours of vacation annually with full pay.

Upon the completion of two years of service in the aggregate, each employee shall
be entitled to 128 hours vacation annually with full pay.

Upon the completion of ten years of service in the aggregate, each employee shall
be entitled to 192 hours vacation annually with full pay.

Upon completion of 30 years of service in the aggregate, each employee shall be
entitled to 200 hours vacation annually with full pay.

On January 1 of each year, vacation time accrued during the previous year shall be
credited to each employee.

Each employee shall be permitted to defer vacation, thereby accumulating unused
vacation time to total not more than the equivalent of two years of vacation credit.

The employee may defer all or a portion of his or her vacation. The employee should
consider the amount of vacation time the employee has accumulated and whether
deferring all or part of the vacation could result in loss of vacation time which will
automatically be deposited in the catastrophic illness or injury time bank. Employees
on extended military leave should consider receiving a cash payment prior to the
commencement of their leave (See Manual Section 3/732.60).

Employees who are required to use CTO instead of vacation time for pre-scheduled
vacation shall be allowed to accumulate those vacation hours over the two-year limit
of vacation credit. The Department will allow an employee to use the vacation hours
accumulated over the two-year limit as soon as practicable if it does not impact the
ability to maintain adequate deployment. The Department shall ensure that an
employee’s total accumulated vacation hours do not exceed three years of vacation
credit.

For the purpose of computing the ten years of service in the aggregate under
Section A above:

1. Any employee shall be deemed to have been in the service of the Police
Department during any period of military service performed by such
employee if said employee was entitled to reinstatement as an employee of
the Police Department after such military service and was, in fact, so
reinstated.

-58-
2. Service of an employee prior to service retirement shall be counted if such
employee is reactivated pursuant to any Charter Section providing the return
or recall to active service of a service-retired pensioner.

3. Service of an employee prior to resignation shall be counted if such
employee is not eligible for pension under the provisions of any applicable
Police Pension System in the Charter or Administrative Code and is
reemployed by the Police Department.

Any employee who, immediately prior to becoming a member of the Police
Department, was employed in any other department of the City and had earned any
unused vacation credits for which the employee was not compensated either in cash
or time off, shall be credited with such unused vacation time in addition to any
vacation to which the employee is entitled.

In the event any employee, after the completion of the employee’s initial year of
service, becomes separated from the service of the Department by reason of
resignation, discharge, retirement, death, or for any other reason, cash payment ofa
sum equal to all earned, but unused vacation, including vacation for the
proportionate part of the year in which the separation takes place, shall be made at
he salary rate current at the date of the separation to the employee, the estate, or
any person legally entitled to such payment, except that an employee who resigns
rom the Police Department for the purpose of accepting employment in the Fire
Department, and who is reemployed in the Fire Department within seven days from
he effective date of the resignation shall not receive cash payment.

The City Controller shall keep a record of vacation time balance based on Police
Department records and shall advise employees on their paycheck of their balance
biweekly.

Employees with ten or more years of service in the aggregate may split their
vacation time into two parts. Employees who choose to split their vacation period or
periods may apply their seniority preference to any one portion. Seniority shall be
defined as total time on the job. The additional vacation time shall be granted ona
reverse seniority basis.

Management is sensitive to the needs of its employees to plan vacations with other
‘amily members. Therefore, when employees are transferred after vacation
scheduling has been completed, it is the intent of management to allow employees
‘0 retain originally designated vacation dates, if possible.

When an employee is transferred, the commanding officer of the organizational unit
into which the employee is transferred shall make every good faith effort to honor
he originally scheduled vacation dates unless:

 

-59-
1. Granting the vacation, as scheduled, will impact on the unit’s ability to
adequately deploy personnel required to accomplish its mission; or

2. The employee requests a change in vacation dates, and such a change can
be made without impacting the deployment needs of the unit.

It is the policy of the Department to allow officers to take regularly scheduled
vacations or remain on vacation during a mobilization unless the officer volunteers to
work or there is an order by the Mayor or the Chief of Police to cancel vacations.

1. An officer who volunteers to work during a mobilization while on a regularly
scheduled vacation may do so subject to the following:

a.

The Department must have a need for the employee to return to work.
Assignments will be made at the discretion of the Department.

Once the employee voluntarily returns to work, the employee may not
resume his or her vacation (including regularly scheduled days off,
accumulated overtime and days off in lieu of a holiday) without the
approval of the Department.

The employee may defer all or a portion of his or her vacation
pursuant to this Article.

Where an employee has elected to defer all or a portion of vacation,
the employee shall be shown on regular duty status for each deferred
vacation day and shall receive overtime compensation according to
the provisions of other Articles of this MOU.

The Department may approve an employee’s use of any remaining
vacation once the situation deescalates and it is determined there is
adequate deployment at all levels of rank.

The Department is under no obligation to reschedule the vacation
during the current calendar year but may do so if it does not impact
the ability to maintain adequate deployment at all levels of rank.

2. When the Mayor or Chief of Police orders officers on regularly scheduled
vacation to return to work during a mobilization, such return is subject to the
following:

The employee may elect to defer all or part of the remaining vacation subject
to the provisions of Paragraphs |.1.c-f of this Article.

-60-
ARTICLE 7.1.1 SENIORITY FOR VACATIONS

Vacation periods shall be selected by rank. Once ranks are grouped, seniority will be based
upon time as a sworn Department employee. Seniority shall be the criterion used in the
selection and scheduling of vacations.

ARTICLE 7.1.2 VACATION BUYBACK

Note: The provisions of this Article shall not be applicable during the term of this
MOU (July 1, 2011, through June 30, 2014).

Beginning July 1, 2014, the City may provide a one-time amount not to exceed $6 million
for the purpose of allowing unit members to work up to 40 hours of pre-scheduled vacation
time. Management shall determine the procedure under which this one-time allotment will
be spent. Limitations of this vacation buyback program include:

1. The vacation time must be worked at a geographic area or traffic division
regardless of the employee’s division of assignment.

2. The employee must be eligible and capable of performing field duties.
3. The Department will determine the dates and times that an officer will work,

the length of the shifts to be worked, and the area or traffic division to which
an officer will be assigned.

4. The Department may require an officer to work such time on consecutive
days.
5. The buyback program will end at such time as the allocated funds have been

fully expended.

6. Disputes concerning the buyback program will be referred to the Dispute
Resolution Committee and shall not be grievable nor arbitrable.

ARTICLE 7.2 SEPARATION FROM SERVICE

Whenever an employee separates from the Los Angeles Police Department, the employee
can use no more than 30 calendar days of any combination of time, i.e., vacation, accrued
compensatory time, days off and days off in lieu of a holiday. Any exception must be
approved by the Chief of Police.

Any employee who is eligible and wishes to buy back service time towards pension credits

must have completed this transaction at least three months prior to submitting a request for
a pension.

-61-
ARTICLE 7.3 HOLIDAYS AND HOLIDAY PREMIUMS

A.

Employees appointed during the calendar year shall be entitled to the number of
remaining holiday hours off in lieu of holidays as designated on the Deployment
Schedule for that calendar year. All other sworn employees shall receive holiday
hours during each calendar year as specified in Article 4.1.

Notwithstanding the paragraph above, employees who work on the following
holidays shall receive holiday premium compensation as described in paragraph C
of this Article. Beginning on the date this MOU is approved, all holiday premium
compensation shall be provided in the form of time off with pay. Unless the parties
agree to extend this “time only” limitation, this provision will sunset on June 30,
2014.

New Year's Day - All Watches
Easter - All Watches
Memorial Day - All Watches
Independence Day - All Watches
Labor Day - All Watches
Thanksgiving - All Watches
Christmas Eve - All Watches
Christmas Day - All Watches
New Year's Eve - All Watches

Holiday premium compensation shall be submitted as straight time equal to one half
of the actual hours worked for a maximum of six hours straight time. For example,
officers assigned to an 8-hour shift will receive premium compensation of 4 hours;
officers assigned to a 9-hour shift will receive premium compensation of 4.5 hours;
officers assigned to a 10-hour shift will receive premium compensation of 5 hours;
and officers assigned to a 12-hour shift will receive premium compensation of 6
hours. Premium compensation shall not apply to overtime hours worked in excess
of the normal tour of duty.

Employees called out or scheduled to work on an overtime basis during a shift
specified for premium compensation are entitled to premium compensation in
accordance with Paragraph C above in addition to the overtime compensation. For
example, an employee recalled to work who works 7 hours of overtime would
receive time-and-one-half overtime compensation for the 7 hours plus premium
compensation of 3.5 hours at straight time. The maximum premium compensation
remains at 6 hours straight time regardless of how many overtime hours are worked.

Notwithstanding the first and second Paragraphs of this Article, whenever a special
holiday is declared by proclamation of the Mayor with concurrence of the Council,
the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to grant to each employee a day off with full
pay. Such day off shall be in addition to any other day off authorized and granted
each employee under the provisions of this MOU and may be allowed either on the

-62-
same day that is declared a special holiday by the Mayor and the Council or on any
subsequent day at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE 7.4 SICK LEAVE ACCRUAL

Every employee shall be entitled to sick leave with full pay as herein provided if compelled
to be absent from work on account of any illness or injury other than that caused by or
arising from the employee's own moral turpitude. Such sick leave shall be allowed as
follows:

1. During the calendar year in which the employee is appointed and during each
subsequent calendar year, the employee shall be allowed sick leave not to exceed
96 hours at full pay, 40 hours at 75% of full pay, and 40 hours at 50% of full pay,
plus the hours of sick leave accrued and accumulated in the manner set forth herein
below. As used in this Article, the term "calendar year" shall mean the period
commencing on the first day of the payroll period during which January 1st occurs
and ending on the day immediately preceding the first day of the payroll period
during which the next succeeding January 1st occurs.

2. The allowance of sick leave provided for in this Article shall accrue and accumulate
in the manner specified herein while the employee is absent on military leave.

ARTICLE 7.5 SICK LEAVE USAGE

A. 1. In all cases where an employee is compelled to be absent from duty on
account of such illness or injury, as defined in Article 7.4 above, or pregnancy
(to the extent allowed by law), the employee shall report the same as soon as
practicable to the Department. The Department may require such employee
to be examined by the Occupational Health and Safety Division of the
Personnel Department, which shall report its findings to the Department;
provided that any employee who has used less than five days shall not be
unreasonably subject to such mandatory examination.

2. The Department may also require, to the extent the law and Paragraph A.1.
of this Article permits, that the employee provide proof from a health care
provider which shall include the necessity for the absence and a prognosis of
the condition. The request for proof by the Department shall not be arbitrary
or capricious, and must be based on articulable facts. Failure to provide the
proof of the necessity for the absence and a prognosis of the condition may
result in the termination of the employee's sick benefits for the incident in
question.

3. In all cases where an employee is absent for eight or more days due to
illness or injury, the employee shall provide proof from a medical doctor
which shall include the necessity for the absence, prognosis of the condition
and duty restrictions, if any.

-63-
Upon approval of the Department, any employee may be allowed sick leave with full
pay not to exceed an aggregate of 24 hours in any one calendar year, but not less
than one hour at any one time, which shall be included in the allowance of sick leave
at full pay under this Section for the purpose of securing preventive medical, dental,
optical or other like treatment or examination for the employee and for the members
of the employee’s immediate family.

Every female employee shall be entitled to use sick leave accrued pursuant to this
Article if unable to work on account of her pregnancy, childbirth or related medical
conditions.

ARTICLE 7.6 ACCUMULATED SICK LEAVE

A.

Any unused balance of an employee’s 100% sick leave bank remaining at the end of
each calendar year of this MOU shall be carried over to the following calendar year.
That bank may accumulate to a maximum of 800 hours. Any 100% sick leave
remaining unused at the end of each calendar year, which, if added to an
employee’s accumulated 100% sick leave will exceed 800 hours, shall, as soon as
practicable, be credited to the employee in time off with pay at the rate of 50%.
(For example, an employee who would ordinarily receive the maximum of 96 hours
of excess sick leave paid in cash at 50% of his/her salary rate — the equivalent of 48
hours at full pay - will instead receive 48 hours of time off with pay). Such time will
be credited to a separate time bank. Employees will be able to utilize “SE” hours in
a manner similar to CTO hours.

If any employee becomes separated from the service of the Department by reasons
of retirement or death, any balance of accumulated sick leave at full pay remaining
unused at the time of separation shall be compensated to the employee, or in the
event of separation due to the death of the employee, to the employee's estate, by
cash payment of 50% of the employee's salary rate current at such date of
separation. In no instance will an employee or an employee's estate be
compensated more than once for accumulated full pay sick leave upon retirement or
upon the death of the employee. The City Council may, by resolution, authorize cash
payment to the legal beneficiaries of a member of the Police Department, who, on or
after January 1, 1990, suffered or suffers a duty-related death, for the balance of the
member’s accumulated full-pay sick leave at 100% of the member's salary rate on
the date of his or her death. In no instance shall a member or his or her beneficiaries
be compensated more than once for accumulated sick leave upon retirement, death,
or death in the performance of duties of the member.

If an employee becomes separated from the service of the Police Department by
reason of resignation and is thereafter employed by the Department within seven
days after the effective date of said resignation, the unused balance of all sick leave,
accrued and accumulated in the Police Department, as of the effective date of such
resignation, shall be restored.

-64-
D. If an employee of the Police Department was, within seven days prior to becoming
an employee, an employee of any department of the City, including an employee
member of the Police Department, the unused balance of all sick leave accrued and
compensated in the department from which the employee resigned, as of the
effective date of such resignation, shall be restored.

E. Any unused balance of sick leave at 75% of full pay at the end of any calendar year
and any unused balance of sick leave at 50% of full pay at the end of any calendar
year shall be carried over and accumulated from one calendar year to the next toa
maximum of 800 hours at 75% pay and 800 hours at 50% pay. All accrued sick
leave at partial pay in excess of such maximum amounts shall be deemed waived
and lost.

ARTICLE 7.7 FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE
Provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) are specified in Appendix M.
ARTICLE 7.8 FAMILY ILLNESS

Each employee covered by this MOU shall be entitled to the following family illness leave
provisions:

A. Each employee who is absent from work by reason of the illness or injury of a
member of the employee’s immediate family, and who has accrued unused
100%, 75% or 50% sick leave, shall be allowed a leave of absence with pay
at the appropriate pay rate (100%, 75% or 50%) not to exceed in the
aggregate twelve days in any one calendar year. As used in this Article the
term “calendar year” shall mean the period commencing on the first day of
the payroll period during which January 1° occurs and ending on the day
immediately preceding the first day of the payroll period during which the next
January 1°‘ occurs.

B. Each employee shall furnish, if required by the Chief of Police, satisfactory
proof from a health care provider which shall include the necessity for the
absence and an expected date of return to duty. The request for proof by
the Department shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and must be based on
articulable facts.

Cc. The aggregate number of days of absence for which pay may be allowed
under this Article shall be included in the number of days for which sick leave
with full pay is allowed.

D. “Immediate family” shall include the father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-

law, brother, sister, spouse, child, stepparent, stepchild, foster child,
grandchild, or other minor dependent or any household member (any person

-65-
residing in the immediate household of the employee at the time of illness or
injury). The definition of “immediate family” shall include the domestic partner
of an employee and the following relatives of an employee’s domestic
partner: child, grandchild, mother, father.

Any employee claiming a domestic partner for purposes of this Article shall
complete a confidential affidavit to be filed in the Employee Benefits Office,
Personnel Department, which shall be signed by the City employee and the
domestic partner, declaring the existence of a domestic partnership. No
affidavit is required to secure family illness benefits arising from the illness or
injury of a household member.

By extending to an employee the specific benefits defined by this Article, the
City does not intend to confer or to imply any other unspecified benefits to
such employee, or to the employee’s domestic partner, or to the employee’s
household members, or to any other person.

ARTICLE 7.9 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

A.

Each member of this Unit shall be entitled to three days leave of absence with full
pay for a death in the employee's immediate family. Any employee may, at the
employee's option, choose to use up to two additional days of leave (or up to four
additional days when out-of-state travel is required) in conjunction with any
bereavement leave. Such additional days of leave shall be, in descending priority,
compensatory time off or, if no compensatory time off is available for use, vacation
leave or, if neither compensatory time off nor vacation leave is available for use, sick
leave.

Each employee shall furnish, if required by the Chief of Police, a death certificate or
other satisfactory proof of the death to justify any bereavement leave.

"Immediate family" shall include the father, father-in-law, mother, mother-in-law,
brother, sister, spouse, child, stepparent, stepchild, foster child, grandparent,
grandchild or any minor dependent or any household member (any member residing
in the immediate household of the employee at the time of death). The definition of
"immediate family" shall include the domestic partner of the employee and the
following relatives of an employee's domestic partner: child, grandchild, mother,
father. Simultaneous, multiple family deaths will be considered as one occurrence.

Any employee claiming a domestic partner for purposes of this Article shall complete
a confidential affidavit to be filed in the Employee Benefits Office, Personnel
Department, which shall be signed by the City employee and the domestic partner,
declaring existence of a domestic partnership. No affidavit is required to secure
bereavement leave benefits arising from the death of a household member. By
extending to an employee the specific benefits defined by this Article, the City does
not intend to confer or to imply any other unspecified benefits to such employee, or

-66-
to the employee's domestic partner, or to the employee's household members, or to
any other person.

ARTICLE 7.10 HEALTH INSURANCE

A.

Management will provide a monthly subsidy toward the cost of any one of the
following health plans for employees in this representation unit:

Police Blue Cross/Prudent Buyer

Police Kaiser

Police Blue Cross/California Care

L.A. City-sponsored plans

Any other plan submitted by the League and approved by the City for which
an employee is eligible.

APONSD

Management's monthly health subsidy for employees in this representation unit will
be as follows:

1. Operative July 1, 2011, management will provide a monthly subsidy not to
exceed $1,060.54 per month.

2. Operative July 1, 2012, management will provide an additional amount equal
to the percentage increase in medical inflation as calculated by the Fire and
Police Pension System, not to exceed 5%.

3. Operative July 1, 2013, management will provide an additional amount equal
to the percentage increase in medical inflation as calculated by the Fire and
Police Pension System, not to exceed 5%.

The City will apply this sum first to the employee’s coverage. The amount to be
applied to the employee-only coverage will be the actual amount required, but not to
exceed $749.12 per month for Fiscal Year 2011-12. The provisions of paragraphs
7.10 B.2 and B.3 above are applicable to this amount. Any remaining balance will be
applied toward the coverage of the employee’s dependents under the plan.

Management will provide continuation of the above medical plan subsidies toward
the cost of health plan premiums for the spouse, domestic partner, and any minor
dependents of any employee killed in the line of duty or who dies from a duty-related
injury after July 1, 1985, while on active payroll status. This coverage shall cease for
dependents when they reach the age of 26 years. However, coverage will continue
for a disabled child of the employee if the child remains unmarried, was dependent
on the employee for financial support, and was disabled before age 18.

Health plan subsidy provisions not covered in this Article will be administered in
accordance with applicable sections of the Los Angeles Administrative Code.

-67-
The City will retain all duties and responsibilities it has had for the administration of
the City’s Health Plans.

The City will expend the above-noted funds only for those employees who enroll ina
plan and are on active payroll status with the City. The City retains all rights to any
unused funds, which may be allocated for the purpose of implementing this Article.

The parties hereby agree that either the City or the League has the option to re-
open the MOU at any time upon written notice to the other party to discuss changing
the health plan administration and benefits.

Any Unit member who can prove health insurance coverage under a spouse or
domestic partner with an adequate plan, may opt out of health insurance coverage
as provided by this Article, and receive a sum of $100 monthly which is not be
considered wages. To be eligible for this opt-out benefit, the member must comply
with the rules and procedures established by the Personnel Department.

Health Plan Subsidy - Domestic Partners

1. Operative July 1, 1994, the definition of a dependent shall include the
domestic partner of an employee and the dependents of such domestic
partner.

2. Any employee claiming a domestic partner and/or the dependents of such
domestic partner for purposes of this Article shall complete a confidential
affidavit to be filed in the Employee Benefits Office, Personnel Department,
which shall be signed by the City employee and the domestic partner,
declaring the existence of a domestic partnership.

3. By extending to an employee the specific benefits defined by this Article, the
City does not intend to confer or imply any other unspecified benefits to such
employee, or to the employee’s domestic partner, or to the dependents of
such domestic partner.

Health Plan Subsidy - Retirees

1. For those members of this Unit who retire after July 1, 1988, such members
shall receive the following benefit based upon years of service, age, and
pension:

a. Basic Benefit: The following benefit and eligibility requirements
pertain to all members who retired after July 1, 1988, on a service
pension unless applicable eligibility requirements have been changed
or the benefit improved in Paragraphs b. or c. below:

Years of Service Benefit

- 68 -
20-24 $75 per month

25-29 $150 per month

30 & over $225 per month

Pension Plan Age for Subsidy
Eligibility

Articles 17&18 58

Article 35 55

b. Eligibility Expansion: Members of this Unit who retire after July 1,
1994, with either a service or a service-connected disability pension
shall be eligible for the retiree health plan subsidy at age 55, upon the
effective date of the enabling ordinance.

Cc. Benefit Improvement: Members of this Unit who retire after July 1,
1996, with either a service or a service-connected disability pension
shall receive the following benefit at age 55:

Years of Service Benefit

20-24 $150 per month
25-29 $225 per month
30 & over $300 per month

This benefit subsidy amount shall not in any case exceed the cost of the
health plan option selected by the retiree.

To receive this subsidy, the retiree must be in a City-approved health plan
and cannot receive this subsidy if such retiree, after retirement from the
Police Department, has accepted a City job and is receiving a City health
insurance subsidy through that job.

The subsidy for retirees shall be administered through the Pension
Department and will be governed by the rules and regulations of the City
health insurance plan subsidy for active employees. The benefits provided
herein do not affect or repeal any other benefit provided for retirees. See,
e.g., Los Angeles Administrative Code Section 4.1150, et seq.

The benefit will begin in the first month after adoption of the enabling
Ordinance and the dollar subsidy will not be retroactive.

-69-
6. The parties agree that any change in this benefit must first be negotiated by
the City Administrative Officer and the Police Protective League as part of the
meet and confer process and any change made through any other process
shall not be recognized by the City.

7. The parties agree to implement a cash in lieu of health insurance subsidy on
a reimbursement basis for retired sworn members who reside in an area
where they cannot access a City sponsored or approved Managed Care
Health Plan (HMO). Details for plan administration need to be worked out
prior to implementation. The effective date of this program will be when the
parties have completed all necessary procedures to affect this benefit. This
benefit is not retroactive.

Health Plan Subsidy — Family and Medical Leave Provision

Employees shall be eligible for a continued health plan subsidy while on Family or
Medical Leave, under the provisions of Appendix M of this MOU. However, for any
unpaid portion of Family or Medical Leave, the health subsidy shall be continued for
a maximum of nine (9) pay periods. The continuation of the health plan subsidy will
be provided only under the following conditions:

1. The employee shall have been enrolled in a health plan listed in Paragraph A
of this Article prior to the beginning of the leave.

2. The City will not continue the subsidy if the employee is covered under a
health plan which is not listed in Paragraph A of this Article.

3. The continuance of the health plan subsidy shall include coverage of any new
dependent.

ARTICLE 7.11 DENTAL INSURANCE

A.

Management will provide continuation of the dental subsidy for the spouse, domestic
partner, and any minor dependents of any employee killed in the line of duty or who
dies from a duty-related injury after July 1, 1985, while on active payroll status. This
coverage shall cease for minor dependents when they reach the age of 18 years, or
25 years if unmarried and attending an accredited school on a full-time basis.
However, coverage will continue for a disabled child of the employee if the child
remains unmarried, was dependent on the employee for financial support, and was
disabled prior to age 18.

Operative July 1, 2011, the City will expend a maximum of $73 per month for
employees enrolled in the League-sponsored Dental Service. Operative July 1,
2012, this amount will increase to $74.50. Operative July 1, 2013, this amount will
increase to $76.00.

-70-
Operative July 1, 2011, the City will expend a maximum of $70 per month for
employees enrolled in any of the following dental plans. Operative July 1, 2012, this
amount will increase to $71.40. Operative July 1, 2013, this amount will increase to
$72.80.

1. Police Relief Association self-insured Dental Insurance Plan

2. Any other plan submitted by the League and approved by Management for
which an employee is eligible

3. L.A. City-sponsored plans

In the event the monthly Delta Dental one-party rate decreases at any time, such
decrease shall not result in a reduction of the City’s dental subsidy.

The City will apply this contribution first to the employee’s coverage. Any remaining
balance will be applied toward the coverage of the employee’s dependents under
the same plan.

The City subsidy for employees who enroll in any of the above dental plans will be
applied toward plan premiums scheduled for payroll deduction in the first payroll
period following the employee’s enrollment.

Employees who are enrolled in more than one of the dental plans for which a
subsidy is provided may only receive one subsidy. If the employee was receiving a
subsidy on July 1, 1985, the employee will continue to receive the subsidy for that
dental plan, unless the employee submits a new payroll deduction card.

The City will expend the above-noted funds only for those employees who enroll in
said plans and remain on active payroll status with the City. The City retains all
rights to any unused funds, which may be allocated for the purpose of implementing
this Article.

For those employees enrolled in any plan, other than the City-sponsored plan, who
authorize the City Controller to cover any additional costs of the plan, the City will
remit to the sponsor of the plan a separate amount and an appropriate deduction list
at an address to be specified by the sponsor.

The City is not responsible for nor expected to provide any additional accounting,
administrative bookkeeping, clerical or other services except as provided for in the
above paragraphs. The League assumes all responsibility for any services which
may arise out of the administration of plans it administers.

The League shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless against any and all

claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability that shall arise out of or result from
any action taken by the City for purposes of complying with this Article, or by failure

-71-
of the League or any of the dental carriers to provide the coverage and services
agreed to between the sponsors and the carriers.

K. The City will retain all duties and responsibilities it has had for the administration of
the City Dental Insurance Plan.

L. Dental Plan Subsidy - Domestic Partners

1. Operative July 1, 1994, the definition of a dependent shall include the
domestic partner of an employee and the dependents of such domestic
partner.

2. Any employee claiming a domestic partner and/or the dependents of such
domestic partner for the purposes of this Article shall complete a confidential
affidavit to be filed in the Employee Benefits Office, Personnel Department,
which shall be signed by the City employee and the domestic partner,
declaring the existence of a domestic partnership.

3. By extending to an employee the specific benefits defined by this Article, the
City does not intend to confer or imply any other unspecified benefits to such
employee, or to the employee’s domestic partner, or to the dependents of
such domestic partner.

M. Dental Plan Subsidy - Family and Medical Leave Provisions

Employees shall be eligible for a continued dental plan subsidy while on Family or
Medical Leave, under the provisions of Appendix M of this MOU. However, for any
unpaid portion of Family or Medical Leave, the dental subsidy shall be continued for
a maximum of nine (9) pay periods. The continuation of the dental plan subsidy will
be provided only under the following conditions:

1. The employee shall have been enrolled in a dental plan listed in Paragraph B
prior to the beginning of the leave.

2. The City will not continue the subsidy if the employee is covered under a
dental plan not listed in Paragraph B.

3. The continuance of the dental plan subsidy shall include coverage of any new
dependent.

ARTICLE 7.12 LIFE INSURANCE
A. During the term of this MOU, the City shall expend $16 per month for employees

covered in the Life Insurance Program. Enrollment shall be available to all
employees in the Unit regardless of League membership or affiliation.

-72-
Management will provide continuation of the above Life Insurance Program subsidy
toward a life insurance policy issued on the life of the spouse or domestic partner of
any officer killed in the line of duty after July 1, 1985, provided such policy is issued
through the League. Such policy shall name the minor children of said officer as
beneficiaries. This subsidy shall be provided only if such employee had a life
insurance policy in effect, through the League, at the time of the employee’s death.

Note: The above benefit was extended to include a domestic partner after July 1,
1994.

In order for a domestic partner to be eligible for the continuation of life insurance
subsidy, a confidential affidavit shall have been filed with the Employee Benefits
Office, Personnel Department, signed by the City employee and the domestic
partner, declaring the existence of a domestic partnership. By extending to an
employee the specific benefits defined by this Article, the City does not intend to
confer or imply any other unspecified benefits to such employee, or to the
employee’s partner, or to the dependents of such domestic partner.

Dependents who have reached their 18th birthday and are not full-time students are
not eligible for coverage.

Dependent children may remain beneficiaries of the above policy up to the age of 21
if unmarried and attending an accredited school on a full-time basis.

The City will expend the above-noted funds only for those employees who enroll ina
plan and remain on active payroll status with the City. The City retains all rights to
any unused funds, which may be allocated for the purpose of implementing this
Section.

The City will provide the subsidy for the League plan in 24 biweekly increments
annually. The City will remit to the League an aggregate amount equal to the sum of
the subsidy paid for those employees enrolled in said plans who are on active
payroll status, together with a list of those employees who qualify for the subsidy
during each payroll period. Remittance of this aggregate amount will be made within
30 working days after the conclusion of the payroll period in which the subsidy was
paid.

For those employees enrolled in the plan who authorize the City Controller to make
a payroll deduction to cover an additional cost of said life insurance plan, the City
will remit to the League a separate amount and appropriate deduction list in
accordance with established policy and procedures.

The City is not responsible for nor expected to provide any additional accounting,
administrative bookkeeping, clerical or other services except as provided for in the
above paragraphs. The League assumes all responsibility for any services, which
may arise out of the administration of the life insurance plan.

-73-
J. The League shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless against any and all
claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability that shall arise out of or result from
any action taken by the City for purposes of complying with this Article, or by failure
of the League or its life insurance carrier to provide the coverage and services
agreed to between the League and the carrier.

K. The subsidy amount will be provided only to those employees enrolled in the
League-sponsored life insurance plan.

ARTICLE 7.13 INJURED ON DUTY PAY

A. Disability claims shall be paid as provided for in Administrative Code Section 4.177.
In accordance with Andersen v. Workers Compensation Board (2007) 149 Cal. App.
4" 1369, employees may elect to use their accrued sick leave, accrued vacation
ime, or accumulated CTO to supplement the Workers Compensation State Rate
benefit described in Administrative Code Section 4.177 in order to receive up to the
equivalent of their regular salary. In accordance with Workers Compensation law,
employees who are temporarily disabled and eligible for the State Rate benefit
cannot use accrued leave or accumulated time off before, or instead of, receiving
he State Rate benefit.

B. An employee who is absent from work as a result of an illness or injury arising out of
he course and scope of employment, and who qualifies for the benefits available
under Labor Code Section 4850, shall be entitled to the salary he or she would have
received but for the absence, including, but not limited to, all bonuses, incentives,
hazard pay, special pay, and premium pay, as allowed under Labor Code Section
4850. Employees in this situation shall be required to continue their regular
contribution to the Fire and Police Pension System.

 

ARTICLE 7.14 EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

The League shall contract with a City-approved employee assistance service provider.
Such provider shall employ qualified staff to provide family counseling services in the areas
of: chemical dependency, alcohol, drug, and substance abuse, juvenile delinquency,
marital, legal, financial, or other problems. The method of treatment shall include:
identification of problem, counseling, referral to appropriate service provider for extended
counseling and/or treatment, and case follow-up.

Any employee claiming a domestic partner and/or dependents of such domestic partner for
purposes of this Article shall complete a confidential affidavit to be filed with the Employee
Benefits Office, Personnel Department, which shall be signed by the City employee and the
domestic partner, declaring the existence of a domestic partnership.

-74-
The EAP service provider shall issue quarterly reports to the League and to the City in care
of the Employee Benefits Section, Personnel Department. These reports shall provide the
following information:

1. The number of persons the program has assisted during the reporting period for
each category of family counseling service.

2. The category of individual receiving service (employee, spouse, dependent child,
domestic partner, and/or dependents of domestic partner).

3. The sex and age of persons served.
4. The number of clients who are repeat users of the service.
5. Treatment program complete data.

Operative July 1, 2011, or as soon thereafter as practical, the City shall reimburse the
League its actual cost of the EAP provider, not to exceed the sum of $717,000 annually,
such reimbursement to be paid at the beginning of each quarter.

After January 1, 2013, the City agrees to meet and confer regarding an increase in the
amount reimbursed after notification from the League of cost increases to the authorized
plan listed above.

In those instances where Management deems the best interest of an employee would be
served, Management may refer such employee to the service provider.

If, in the City’s or the League’s opinion, the EAP provider commits a major breach of any of
the provisions of its agreement, the City may, at its discretion, discontinue further payments
in support of the EAP. Reasons for discontinuing payments include, but are not limited to:
(1) failure of the EAP provider to cooperate with the reasonable requests of City or League
representatives for information as described above regarding quarterly reports, items #1-5;
(2) failure of the EAP provider to comply with the restrictions placed on its operations by
this Agreement.

The League shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless against any and all claims,
demands, suits, including costs of suits and reasonable attorney fees, and/or other forms of
liability arising from the implementation of these provisions and the operation of the EAP.

By extending to an employee the specific benefits defined by this Article, the City does not
intend to confer or imply any other unspecified benefits to such employee, or to the
employee’s partner, or to the dependents of such domestic partner.

Participation by an employee in this EAP in no way diminishes, restricts, or alters the
authority or discretion of the Chief of Police in the imposition of disciplinary action.

-75-
The employee’s participation in the program shall be on the employee’s own time and shall
not be considered hours worked.

ARTICLE 7.15 DEATH BENEFIT

Management will expend a sum not to exceed $15,000 for funeral expenses only to the
heirs of any police officer killed in the line of duty. This amount includes $1,500 already
available for this purpose in accordance with California State Labor Code Section 4701.

ARTICLE 7.16 DEPENDENT CARE REIMBURSEMENT ACCOUNT

During the term of this MOU, Management agrees to maintain a Dependent Care
Reimbursement Account (DCRA), qualified under Section 129 of the Internal Revenue
Code, for active employees who are members of the Fire and Police Pension System,
provided that sufficient enrollment of City employees is maintained to continue to make the
account available. Enrollment in the DCRA is at the discretion of each employee. All
contributions into the DCRA and related administrative fees shall be paid by employees
who are enrolled in the plan. As a qualified Section 129 plan, the DCRA shall be
administered according to the rules and regulations specified for such plans by the Internal
Revenue Service. Since this benefit is subject to the Civilian Benefits Committee, the
League must abide by any policies of the Committee in management of DCRA.

ARTICLE 7.17 HEALTHCARE FLEXIBLE SPENDING ACCOUNT

Employees are eligible to participate in a voluntary Healthcare Flexible Spending Account
administered by the Personnel Department.

ARTICLE 7.18 EDUCATION FUND

Upon the date this MOU is approved, and every July 1 during the term of this MOU, the
City will provide the League with $100,000 to be used exclusively for training and education
for members of this Unit. The funds are to be used for employment-related programs or
degree programs to prepare employees for promotion. Expenditures of these funds will be
at the sole discretion of the Board of Directors of the League, which will also be responsible
for providing the City Administrative Officer with a record of all expenditures on a semi-
annual basis.

SECTION 8.0 GRIEVANCES

Management and the League have a mutual interest in resolving workplace issues
appropriately, expeditiously and at the lowest level possible. In recognition of this mutual
interest, the parties acknowledge that the grievance process is not a replacement for daily
communication between the employee and the supervisor, nor is itinherently an adversarial
process. Rather, it is a process to mutually resolve workplace issues to the maximum
extent possible within the organization.

-76-
ARTICLE 8.1 DEFINITIONS

A. A grievance is defined as a dispute concerning the interpretation or application of
this written MOU or departmental rules and regulations governing personnel
practices or working conditions.

B. A grievant is defined as any employee who is affected by a grievance, the grievant
and representative, if any, or the League when the grievance affects a class or
group of employees.

ARTICLE 8.2 MATTERS NOT GRIEVABLE OR ARBITRABLE

A. Matters that are not subject to this grievance procedure, or to arbitration, include the
following:
1. An impasse in meeting and conferring.
2. Transfers, assignments, promotions, promotional examinations, probationary

terminations of entry-level or tenured employees, and Employee Comment
Sheets (comment cards). These matters are not grievable or arbitrable
whether or not said matters involve discipline.

3. Any other matter involving discipline.

4. A determination of the fitness of an employee to carry a concealable firearm
on or off duty.

5. A determination of the appropriate salary step of probationary employees
based on education and/or prior law enforcement experience.

6. Denial of the use of compensatory time off.
B. These matters are to be dealt with solely by the following procedures:
1. Discipline for permanent employees who have successfully completed their

probationary period shall be through Charter Section 1070 or by the
Administrative Appeal Procedure, Section 9.0, depending on the penalty
assessed.

2. Probationary terminations of entry-level employees involving a liberty interest
and probationary terminations of tenured employees shall be through the
Administrative Appeal Procedure, Section 9.0.

3. Transfer for the purposes of discipline by the Administrative Appeal
Procedure, Section 9.0.

-77-
4. Promotional examinations by appeal to the Civil Service Commission.

5. The fitness of an employee to carry a firearm may be appealed to the Chief
of Police. If not satisfied at the Chief of Police level, an appeal may be made
to the Police Commission, which is the final level of administrative appeal. An
appeal pursuant to this provision shall be filed on an Administrative Appeal,
Form 1.84. It shall be filed with the Director, Office of Administrative Services,
when it is appealed to the Chief of Police.

6. The appropriate salary step of probationary employees based on education
and/or prior law enforcement experience may be appealed to the
Commanding Officer, Personnel Group, whose decision shall be final. An
appeal pursuant to this provision shall be filed on an Administrative Appeal,
Form 1.84. It shall be filed with the Commanding Officer, Personnel Group.

7. Employee Comment Sheets (Comment Cards), Forms 1.77, may be
responded to on an Employee’s Report, Form 15.7, within 30 days of the
initial review. Any employee response shall be attached to the Employee
Comment Sheet (Manual Section 3/760.13).

Note: If the Employee Comment Sheet is subsequently attached to a
Standards Based Assessment, the employee shall have the right to contest
such use via the grievance procedure. However, the Employee Comment
Sheet itself will not be invalidated, destroyed or otherwise removed from the
employee’s personnel package unless such treatment is specifically directed
by an arbitrator through arbitration of the Standards Based Assessment.

Issues that may be related or lead to probationary employee terminations such as,
but not limited to, performance evaluations and comment card entries, or where a
final and binding decision would be counter to the authority of the Chief of Police in
Section 1011 of the Los Angeles City Charter shall be limited in appeal to the
second level of review (Chief of Police Review) and shall not be appealed to the
Police Commission or submitted to arbitration.

Where a matter within the scope of this grievance procedure is alleged to be both a
grievance and an Unfair Employee Relations Practice under the jurisdiction of the
Employee Relations Board, the grievant may elect to pursue the matter either under
the grievance procedure herein provided, or by action before the Employee
Relations Board. Notwithstanding any contrary language in the Employee Relations
Board's rules and regulations, the grievant's election of either procedure shall
constitute a binding election of the remedy chosen and an absolute waiver of any
alternative remedy.

-78-
ARTICLE 8.3 RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS

A.

No grievant shall lose the right to process a grievance because of management
imposed limitations in scheduling meetings.

The grievant has the responsibility to discuss the grievance informally with the
grievant's immediate supervisor. The immediate supervisor will, upon request of a
grievant, discuss the grievance with the employee at a mutually satisfactory time.
The grievant may be represented by a representative of the grievant's choice in the
informal discussion with the grievant's immediate supervisor, and at all formal review
levels, and shall be permitted the opportunity to present witnesses at all formal
levels of review.

Notwithstanding Paragraph B. above, and Paragraphs A.1. and A.2. of Article 8.4,
when an employee is grieving a Standard Based Assessment completed by a
supervisor from a previous entity or division of assignment, the informal discussion
and first level of appeal shall be completed with the immediate supervisor and
commanding officer in the division or entity where the Standard Based Assessment
was completed. The Employee Relations Administrator shall approve any deviation
from the provisions of this Paragraph.

The grievant and the grievant's representative, if not a League Board member, may
have a reasonable amount of paid time off to present the grievance at each level of
review. The grievant and the grievant's representative shall not be entitled to paid
time off to investigate or prepare the grievance. A grievant may not be represented
by a person who is not a member of this representation unit unless he or she has
the written permission of the League.

If a grievance representative must leave the representative's regular assignment to
represent a grievant, the representative shall first obtain permission from the
representative's supervisor. If permission cannot be granted promptly, the grievance
representative will be informed when time can be made available.

The time limits between steps of the grievance procedure may be extended by
mutual agreement. If the last day of an appeal period falls on a weekend or City
holiday, such period shall be extended to the next business day.

Management shall notify the League of any formal grievance filed that involves the
interpretation and/or application of the provisions of this MOU, and a designated
member of the Board of Directors of the League shall have the right to be present at
any formal grievance meeting concerning such a grievance. If the designated
member elects to attend said grievance meeting, the member shall inform the
Employee Relations Administrator of such intention. The League is to be notified of
the resolution of all other formal grievances.

-79-
H. The parties agree that there is a need to hold confidential information obtained
during the investigation of grievances, unfair employee relations practice claims, and
similar employer-employee relations matters. The procedures in Section 8.0 of this
MOU and the City’s Employee Relations Ordinance provide a forum for employees
to freely discuss issues of concern with management and thus enhance morale and
efficiency in the work environment. With the exception of the need for some level of
disclosure in order to conduct investigations, take corrective action, and report
allegations of possible misconduct, Management will hold investigations of
grievances and similar employer-employee matters contained in the files of the Los
Angeles Police Department as confidential privileged official records as provided for
in Evidence Code Section 1040.

I. Whenever a grievant has a representative, the representative shall concurrently
receive all notices the grievant receives at all formal levels of review.

ARTICLE 8.4 PROCEDURE
A. The grievance procedure for employees covered by this MOU shall be as follows:
1. Step 1 - Informal Discussion
a. The grievant shall discuss the grievance with the grievant's immediate

supervisor on an informal basis in an effort to resolve the grievance
and said grievance shall be considered waived if not so presented to
the immediate supervisor within 20 calendar days following the day
during which the event upon which the grievance is based occurred.
Said 20 calendar days may be waived by mutual consent of the
parties involved.

b. The immediate supervisor shall respond within 20 calendar days
following meeting with the grievant. Failure of the immediate
supervisor to respond within the time limit shall entitle the grievant to
process the grievance at the next step.

2. Step 2 - First Level of Review

a. If the grievance is not settled at Step 1, the grievant may serve written
notice of the grievance on a form provided by the Department within
20 calendar days of receipt of the grievance response at Step 1.
Failure of the grievant to serve written notice shall result in the loss of
the right to process the grievance.

b. If written notice is served, said person shall meet with the grievant,
and a written decision and statement of the facts and issues shall be
rendered to the grievant within 20 calendar days from the date of
service. Failure of Management to respond within the time limit shall

-80-
entitle the grievant to process the grievance at the next level of
review.

3. Step 3 - Second Level of Review (Chief of Police Review)

a.

If the grievance is not settled at Step 2, the grievant may serve written
notice of the grievance on said form upon the Chief of Police, via the
Employee Relations Administrator, within 20 calendar days following
receipt of the Step 2 grievance response. Failure of the grievant to
serve notice shall result in the loss of the right to process the
grievance.

If written notice is served, the Employee Relations Administrator, on
behalf of the Chief of Police, shall meet with the grievant, and a
written decision and statement of the facts and issues shall be
rendered to the grievant within 20 calendar days from the date of
service. Failure of Management to respond within the time limit shall
entitle the grievant to process the grievance at the next level of
review.

4. Step 4 - Third Level of Review (Police Commission Review)

a.

If the grievance is not settled at Step 3, the grievant may serve written
notice of the grievance on said form upon the Police Commission or
its designee(s), hereafter Police Commission, within 20 calendar days
following receipt of the grievance response at Step 3. Failure of the
grievant to serve notice shall result in the loss of the right to process
the grievance.

If written notice is served, the Police Commission shall notify the
grievant in writing within 20 calendar days whether it wishes to hear
the grievance. If a decision is reached to hear the grievance, the
Police Commission will afford the grievant an opportunity to present
oral and/or written arguments on the merits of the grievance and shall
render to the grievant, a written decision within 20 calendar days from
the date the Police Commission notified the grievant in writing that it
would hear the grievance. Failure of the Police Commission to
respond in writing within the time limit shall entitle the grievant to
process the grievance at the next level.

If the Police Commission decides not to hear the grievance, or the
League fails to timely request arbitration as provided in Step 5, the
decision at Step 3, Chief of Police Review, will be the final
departmental decision regarding the grievance.

-81-
5.

Step 5 - Arbitration

a.

If the Police Commission decides not to hear the grievance, or fails to
serve written notice pursuant to Step 4 (b), or the written decision at
Step 4 does not settle the grievance, the grievant and the League
jointly may, within 20 calendar days of receiving a written response, or
within 20 calendar days of the expiration of the 20-day period in Step
4 (b), serve upon the Police Commission a notice that a request for
arbitration has been filed with the Employee Relations Board.

The request for arbitration must be filed with the Employee Relations
Board within 20 calendar days of the date the Police Commission
served its response or decision on the grievant or, when no response
at all is received from the Police Commission, within 20 calendar days
of the expiration of the 20-day period in Step 4 (b). Failure of the
League to timely request arbitration within the time herein shall result
in the loss of the right to arbitrate the grievance.

If written notice is served, the parties shall meet for the purpose of
selecting an arbitrator from a list of seven arbitrators furnished by the
Employee Relations Board, within seven calendar days following

receipt of said list.

(1)

(2)

 

Arbitration of a grievance shall be limited to the formal
grievance as originally filed by the grievant to the extent that
said grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved. The
proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with applicable
rules and procedures adopted or specified by the Employee
Relations Board, unless other rules or procedures for the
conduct of such arbitration are specified herein. The fees and
expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared equally by the
parties involved, all other expenses including, but not limited to,
fees for witnesses, transcripts, and similar costs incurred by
the parties during arbitration, will be the responsibility of the
individual incurring same. In any case where there is a
cancellation fee, the party requesting the cancellation shall pay
the fee unless the cancellation is mutually requested. In such
case, the parties shall share the cancellation fee equally.

At an arbitration hearing, generally the League shall present its
case first unless there is a mutual agreement that the
Department will present its case first or the arbitrator
determines there is a compelling reason for the Department to
present its case first.

-82-
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

The decision of an arbitrator resulting from any arbitration of a
grievance shall be binding upon the parties concerned.

The decision of an arbitrator resulting from any arbitration of
grievances shall not add to, subtract from, or otherwise modify
the terms and conditions of this MOU.

The burden of proof in an arbitration shall be a preponderance
of the evidence. As used herein, preponderance of the
evidence shall mean evidence which is of a greater weight or
more convincing than the evidence offered in opposition to it;
that is, evidence which as a whole shows that the fact sought
to be proved is more probable than not. In rendering an opinion
and award, an arbitrator shall judge the evidence by this
standard and this standard alone, regardless of the issue being
arbitrated. In rendering an opinion and award, the arbitrator
shall express in writing the grounds for such opinion and award
so that the parties to the matter can intelligently examine and
determine whether the opinion and award is supported by a
preponderance of the evidence.

If either party to the matter believes that the arbitrator applied a
burden of proof other than a preponderance of the evidence,
that party may appeal the opinion and award to Superior Court
under authority of the California Code of Civil Procedure, or
appeal in writing to the Employee Relations Board within 30
days of issuance of the opinion and award. The party
appealing the matter to the Employee Relations Board shall
serve written notice of the appeal on the other party within five
days. The Employee Relations Board may review the
arbitrator's written opinion and award and the evidence
presented in the case, and, if it conducts such a review, shall
determine by majority vote of the members whether the award
and decision is supported by a preponderance of the evidence.
This ruling, or its decision not to review the matter, shall be
communicated in writing to the parties to the matter within 60
days of the matter having been appealed to the Employee
Relations Board.

If, pursuant to this Article, the Employee Relations Board sets
aside the opinion and award of an arbitrator, the matter may, at
the discretion of either party, be heard before a different
arbitrator.

If the Employee Relations Board rules that the opinion and
award was based on a preponderance of the evidence, if it

-83-
decides not to review the award, or if it fails to act on sucha
request, the objecting party shall comply with the arbitrator's
award. If the objecting party utilizes the Employee Relations
Board in an attempt to obtain such a review, that party waives
any judicial review of that award under the California Code of
Civil Procedure or any other provision.

ARTICLE 8.5 EMERGENCY GRIEVANCE REVIEW PROCEDURE

A.

When a grievant feels that a grievance is of an emergency nature, the grievant shall
submit, on an appropriate form to the Chief of Police, a request for emergency
consideration. The Chief of Police will determine whether an emergency exists and
his decision will be final.

If the Chief of Police determines that an emergency exists, the grievance will be
reviewed at that level and a written decision or statement of facts and issues shall
be rendered to the grievant within 20 calendar days from the date of service. Failure
of Management to respond within such time limit shall entitle the grievant to process
the grievance at the next level of review.

If the emergency grievance is not satisfied by the Chief of Police under the
Emergency Grievance Review Procedure, the grievant may serve written notice of
the grievance upon the Police Commission within 20 calendar days following receipt
of the grievance response. Failure of the grievant to serve notice shall result in the
loss of the right to process the grievance. If notice is served, the Police Commission
shall hear the grievance. The Police Commission will afford the parties an
opportunity to present oral and/or written arguments on the merits of the grievance
and the Police Commission shall render to the grievant a written decision within 20
calendar days from the date of service. Failure of Management to respond within the
time limit shall entitle the grievant to process the grievance at the next level.

If the written decision by the Police Commission does not satisfy the grievance, the
grievant may serve a written notice upon the Police Commission of a timely request
for arbitration as provided for in Step 5 of the Grievance Procedure.

ARTICLE 8.6 PROCEDURES FOR GRIEVANCES AFFECTING A CLASS OR

A.

GROUP OF EMPLOYEES
If the League files a grievance affecting several employees:

1. In one division or Area, the grievance shall first be processed through the
division or Area commanding officer.

2. In more than one division or Area, the grievance shall first be processed
through the Employee Relations Administrator.

-84-
If the Employee Relations Administrator believes that the grievance would more
appropriately be processed by a division or Area commanding officer, the Employee
Relations Administrator may transfer the grievance to that commanding officer and
must immediately notify the League in writing of such transfer. The transfer shall not
extend the time periods for processing the grievance.

The parties agree to mutually cooperate to ascertain the members of the class or
group of employees affected by the grievance when appropriate under the
circumstances.

The grievance procedure for a grievance affecting a class or group of employees
covered by this MOU shall be as follows:

1. Step 1. Presentation of the Grievance

a.

The League shall serve written notice of the grievance on a form
provided by the Department upon the commanding officer or
Employee Relations Administrator within 20 calendar days of which
discovery of the grievance should reasonably have occurred. Said 20
days may be waived by mutual consent of the parties. The grievance
shall be considered waived if not filed within 20 days.

The commanding officer or Employee Relations Administrator shall
meet with the League representative in an effort to resolve the
grievance and shall respond to the League with a written decision
within 20 calendar days from the date of service. Said 20 days may be
waived by mutual consent of the parties. Failure of Management to
respond within the time limit shall entitle the League to process the
grievance at the next level of review.

If the grievance is accepted by the Employee Relations Administrator
at Step 1, that review shall serve as the Chief of Police review for Step
2.

2. Step 2. Chief of Police Review

a.

If the grievance is not settled by the commanding officer at Step 1, the
League may serve written notice of the grievance on said form upon
the Employee Relations Administrator, within 20 calendar days
following receipt of the Step 1 grievance response. Failure of the
League to serve notice shall result in the loss of the right to process
the grievance.

If written notice is served, the Employee Relations Administrator shall
meet with the League representative, and a written decision and
statement of the facts and issues shall be rendered to the League
representative within 20 calendar days from the date of service. Time

-85-
3.

ARTICLE 8.7

limitations imposed in Step 2 may be waived by mutual consent of the
parties. Failure of Management to respond within the time limit shall
entitle the League to process the grievance at the next level of review.

Step 3. Police Commission Review

a.

If the grievance is not settled, the League may serve written notice of
the grievance on said form upon the Police Commission within 20
calendar days following receipt of the grievance response. Said 20
days may be waived by mutual consent of the parties. Failure of the
League to serve notice shall result in the loss of the right to process
the grievance.

If written notice is served, the Police Commission shall decide and
notify the grievant in writing within 20 calendar days whether it wishes
to hear the grievance. If a decision is reached to hear the grievance,
the Police Commission will afford the grievant an opportunity to
present oral and/or written arguments on the merits of the grievance
and shall render to the grievant a written decision within 20 calendar
days from the date the Police Commission notified the grievant in
writing that it would hear the grievance. Failure of the Police
Commission to respond within the time limits shall entitle the grievant
to process the grievance at the next level.

If the Police Commission decides not to hear the grievance, or the
written decision at the Chief of Police Review does not settle the
grievance, the League may request arbitration in Article 8.4, Step 5.

EXPEDITED ARBITRATION PROCEDURE

By mutual agreement, the parties may submit any grievance, which has reached the
arbitration level, to expedited arbitration. The expedited arbitration procedures are as

follows:

1. The selection of the arbitrator shall be conditioned upon the arbitrator's ability to
submit a written ruling to the parties within 48 hours.

2. An expedited arbitration shall not be officially transcribed unless it is requested by
Management or the League. In the event of such a request, the party requesting the
transcript shall pay the cost.

SECTION 9.0

ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS

The parties agree that the procedures in Section 9.0 may be modified during the term of
this MOU if there is mutual agreement on the modifications. This section is not applicable
for matters involving reassignment of a sworn employee from an advanced paygrade

- 86-
position, deselection from a bonus position, or denial of promotion on grounds other than
merit. Such matters shall be conducted in conformance with rules and procedures adopted
by the Department.

A "dispute" as used in this Section is not intended to limit the definition of a "grievance" in
this MOU or as defined in the Employee Relations Ordinance. If a matter is a "grievance," it
must be processed through the grievance procedure, and not through the administrative
appeal process specified in this Section. Conversely, if a matter is subject to administrative
appeal, it must be processed through the administrative appeal process, and not through
the grievance process. Tenured employees wishing to appeal only the penalty for a
suspension of one to 22 days may use this process subject to the provisions of Article
9.1.B. For all appeals conducted pursuant to the provisions of this Section, the
recommendation of the hearing officer is non-binding on the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE 9.1 MATTERS SUBJECT TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL
A. General Dispute

A general dispute may arise from a Department-initiated transfer for purposes of
punishment.

Note: The League and its members reserve the right to challenge a dispute
concerning a transfer on constitutional or other legal grounds.

B. Discipline of 22 Days or Less Involving Tenured Employees

Includes the following:

1. A sustained personnel complaint disposition that is not subject to a hearing
before a Board of Rights (paper penalty, including “sustained, no penalty”);
or,

2. A penalty of a one- to 22-day suspension if the employee agrees to:

a. Waive a Board of Rights hearing; and,
b. Admit guilt; and,

c. Limit the appeal to the degree of penalty (with the understanding that
the original penalty can not be increased).

Cc. Termination of Entry-Level Probationary Employees for Misconduct Involving
a Liberty Interest

Misconduct involves a liberty interest when the misconduct results in charges of
dishonesty or involves moral turpitude that could:

-87-
1. Stigmatize the employee’s reputation; and,

2. Seriously impair the employee’s opportunity to earn a living, or seriously
damage he employee’s standing or association in the community; and,

3. The employee asserts the allegations are false.

Note: This only applies to entry-level probationary termination and not to termination
on probation from a promotional position.

D. Categorical Use of Force Adjudications of Administrative Disapproval -
Extensive Retraining
Includes findings for:
1. Tactics
2. Drawing and Exhibiting
3. Use of Force
Note: Findings of Administrative Disapproval — Notice to Correct Deficiencies and
Administrative Disapproval — Personnel Complaint may be appealed through
separate procedures established for those actions.

ARTICLE 9.2 NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEE; REQUEST FOR HEARING

If an employee decides to administratively appeal a matter specified in Article 9.1, the
employee shall, within the below specified time period, notify the Department that the
employee requests an administrative appeal hearing. If the last day of the appeal period
falls on a weekend or City holiday, such period shall be extended to the next business day.
If the employee fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time, the decision of the
Chief of Police shall be binding. Requests for an administrative appeal hearing shall be filed
as specified below.

A.

General Dispute

A request to appeal a matter falling within the definition of a general dispute, as
defined in Article 9.1.A., shall be filed within 20 calendar days after the date the
employee was notified, or the effective date of the appealable action, whichever is
later. The request shall be filed on an Administrative Appeal, Form 1.84, with the
Employee Relations Administrator.

- 88-
Discipline of 22 Days or Less Involving Tenured Employees

A request to appeal a disciplinary matter involving a tenured employee, as defined in
Article 9.1.B., shall be filed within 20 calendar days after the employee was served
with a penalty not subject to a hearing before a Board of Rights (paper penalty); ora
Complaint and Relief From Duty, Suspension or Demotion, Form 1.61, for a one-to
22-day suspension. The request shall be filed on an Administrative Appeal, Form
1.84, with the Advocate Section, Internal Affairs Administrative Division.

Note: A sworn tenured employee may elect to appeal a one-to- 22-day suspension
to either a Board of Rights or an administrative appeal subject to the provisions of
each procedure. The election of either procedure shall constitute a binding election
of the appeal procedure chosen and an absolute waiver of the alternate appeal
procedure.

Termination of Entry-Level Probationary Employees for Misconduct Involving
a Liberty Interest

A request to appeal the termination of a probationary employee for a matter
involving a liberty interest, as defined in Article 9.1.C., shall be filed within 20
calendar days after the employee was served with the decision of the Chief of Police
on a Notice of Termination or Suspension of Sworn Probationary Employee, Form
1.61.1. The request shall be filed on an Administrative Appeal, Form 1.84, with the
Advocate Section, Internal Affairs Administrative Division.

Categorical Use of Force Adjudications of Administrative Disapproval -
Extensive Retraining

A request to appeal a Categorical Use of Force (CUOF) finding of Administrative
Disapproval — Extensive Retraining shall be filed within twenty (20) calendar days
after the employee was served by the employee’s commanding officer with the
decision of the Chief of Police on a CUOF Internal Process Report, Form 01.67.01.
The request shall be filed on an Administrative Appeal, Form 1.84.00, with the
Advocate Section, Internal Affairs.

If the last day of the appeal period falls on a weekend or City holiday, such period
shall be extended to the next business day. If the employee fails to request a
hearing within the prescribed time, the decision of the Chief of Police shall be
binding.

ARTICLE 9.3 PURPOSE OF ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL HEARINGS

The purpose of an administrative appeal hearing is based on the type of administrative
appeal requested. The employee shall have the right to appear in-person at the hearing
and present information specifically related to the purpose of such hearing as stated below.

-89-
General Dispute

The purpose of an administrative appeal hearing for a general dispute relating to a
Department-initiated transfer is to provide the employee an opportunity to appeal the
Department’s action. The Department bears no burden of proof in this hearing.
Evidence is not required but may be provided by the Department. The Department
may present a case at its discretion. Should the Department elect to present a case,
notice of this decision must be given to the appellant and/or his or her
representative/attorney no later than two business days prior to the date of the
hearing. The hearing officer may request specific information from the Department,
but may not compel the Department to present a case. Notwithstanding a decision
by the Department to present a case, it bears no burden of proof in the
administrative appeal hearing.

Discipline of 22 Days or Less Involving Sworn Employees

1. For an administrative appeal of discipline that is not subject to a hearing
before a Board of Rights (paper penalty) involving sworn tenured employees,
the Department shall bear the burden of proof to establish by a
preponderance of evidence that the Department’s action should remain.

2. The purpose of an administrative appeal hearing for discipline of a one-to-
22-day suspension involving sworn tenured employees is to provide the
employee an opportunity to challenge the degree of the penalty, with the
understanding that the original penalty can not be increased.

Termination of Entry-Level Probationary Employees for Misconduct Involving
a Liberty Interest

The purpose of an administrative appeal hearing for the termination of a sworn
entry-level probationary employee based on charges of misconduct involving a
liberty interest is to provide the employee an opportunity to refute the charge, clear
the employee’s name, and establish a formal record of the circumstances
surrounding the employee’s termination. The Department bears no burden of proof
in this hearing. Evidence is not required but may be provided by the Department.
The Department may present a case at its discretion. Should the Department elect
to present a case, notice of this decision must be given to the appellant and/or his or
her representative/attorney no later than two business days prior to the date of the
hearing. The hearing officer may request specific information from the Department,
but may not compel the Department to present a case. Notwithstanding a decision
by the Department to present a case, it bears no burden of proof in the
administrative appeal hearing.

-90-
D. Categorical Use of Force Adjudications of Administrative Disapproval -
Extensive Retraining

The purpose of an administrative appeal hearing for a Categorical Use of Force
Adjudication of Administrative Disapproval — Extensive Retraining is to provide the
employee an opportunity to appeal the Department’s action. The Department shall
bear the burden of proof to establish by a preponderance of evidence that the
Department's action should remain.

ARTICLE 9.4 SELECTION OF HEARING OFFICER; RESPONSIBILITIES

The hearing officer shall be a civilian member of the Police Commission’s approved list of
hearing officers. The selection of the hearing officer shall be completed within five business
days of the date the employee requests a hearing. The selection of the hearing officer shall
be done in accordance with Section 176 of the Board of Rights Manual dated October
2005.

A hearing officer may recuse him or herself if they believe they have a conflict of interest
with the case or have engaged in any action that would create the appearance of
impropriety, bias, or would cast doubt on their impartiality. Such recusal shall be submitted
in writing to the commanding officer of the entity responsible for the appeal hearing. The
commanding officer of the entity responsible for the appeal hearing shall make a decision
regarding the recusal and notify the affected employee and his/her representative within
five business days. If necessary, a new hearing officer shall be selected within five
business days of the notification.

Disputes regarding the recusal of a hearing officer for any of the above reasons that cannot
be resolved by the commanding officer of the entity responsible for the appeal hearing may
be submitted to the Director of the Office of Administrative Services for general disputes, or
the Chief of Professional Standards Bureau for discipline.

The hearing officer shall convene the hearing in no less than 15 days nor more than 30
days from the date of his or her selection. The hearing officer may continue the
proceedings, once commenced, for periods up to 21 days. If the hearing officer, due to
illness or prescheduled vacation, is unable to begin the hearing within 30 days, the
employee appealing may either select another hearing officer by starting the selection
process anew or may waive the 30-day period to allow the hearing officer to return. If the
employee opts to waive the 30-day period, the hearing officer, upon return from illness or
vacation, shall commence the hearing within 30 days.

The hearing officer may examine witnesses testifying for the Department or employee, if
any are presented. However, the hearing officer shall not consider issues or matters that
were not originally stated at the time the administrative appeal was filed or matters that are
beyond the scope of the administrative appeal hearing purpose. The formal rules of
evidence do not apply, although the hearing officer shall have discretion to exclude
evidence that is irrelevant or the presentation of which will otherwise consume undue time.

-91-
For disciplinary matters that are not subject to a hearing before a Board of Rights (paper
penalty), or when the employee has not previously admitted guilt for penalties of one-to
five-days, the hearing officer shall read the charge(s) to the employee and elicit a “guilty” or
“not guilty” response from the employee to each charge.

ARTICLE 9.5 DISCOVERY; SUBPOENAS; WITNESSES; RECORD OF HEARING

A.

Discovery. Discovery shall consist of copies of all reports and materials used to
substantiate the decision as to the matter being appealed. Discovery material shall
be provided as soon as practicable after selection of a hearing officer, but no later
than 14 days prior to the date the hearing commences. Any dispute over whether
specific materials are subject to discovery shall be referred to the selected hearing
officer for resolution prior to the hearing date. The decision of the hearing officer
shall be final.

For appeal hearings of adjudications of Administrative Disapproval — Extensive
Retraining for Categorical Uses of Force discovery shall consist of copies of
Department-generated reports or materials used to substantiate the decision as to
the matter being appealed. These include:

1. The Intradepartmental Correspondence, Form 15.2, from the Chief of Police
to the Board of Police Commissioners.

2. Use of Force Review Board checklist form.
3. A Use of Force Review Board Minority Report, if applicable.

4. An electronic copy of the Force Investigation Division investigation that was
used by the Use of Force Review Board, the Chief of Police and the Board of
Police Commissioners.

5. The PowerPoint presentation(s) used to brief the Board of Police
Commissioners.

6. Other materials requested will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

Subpoenas. Subpoenas shall be issued pursuant to the authority provided by the
Los Angeles City Charter. Subpoenas may be quashed by written motion to the
hearing officer, who will decide the issue.

Witnesses. The Department and the employee have the right to call and cross-
examine witnesses, whose testimony shall be given under oath. A complete list of
witnesses to be called shall be delivered to the other party no later than seven days
before the hearing, except rebuttal witnesses. Department employees called as
witnesses shall be served with a Notice of Hearing, and witnesses other than
Department employees shall be served by subpoena. The Department

-92-
representative shall be responsible for obtaining all subpoenas. Each party is
responsible to serve their own subpoenas.

D. Record of Hearings
All testimony shall be given under oath. The Department shall audio tape-record the
hearing. The Department will provide the employee a free copy of the audiotape.
The employee may also record the hearing with his or her own audio recording
device if desired.

ARTICLE 9.6 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF HEARING OFFICER

At the conclusion of the hearing, after reviewing all information presented, the hearing
officer shall prepare a report recommending that: (1) the charge(s) be sustained or not
sustained (paper penalty); (2) the penalty remain the same or be reduced; or (3) the appeal
be denied or granted. The hearing officer shall articulate in the report the basis for the
findings. The hearing officer shall also complete the decision portion of a Decision of the
Hearing Officer Administrative Appeal Hearing and Order of the Chief of Police, Form
1.73.1, and forward this with the hearing officer's report to the Chief of Police within 30
days of the conclusion of the hearing.

ARTICLE 9.7 FINAL DETERMINATION

The Chief of Police shall make a final decision in the matter within 60 days of receiving the
Form 1.73.1 and the hearing officer's report, and shall complete the Order of the Chief of
Police portion of Form 1.73.1. The Chief of Police may adopt or reject, in whole or in part,
the proposed findings of the hearing officer, as appropriate under the circumstances. The
decision of the Chief of Police shall be final. The Form 1.73.1 and the hearing officer's
report shall be returned to the Employee Relations Administrator, who shall cause it to be
served on the employee and distributed within 10 days.

SECTION 10.0 REPRESENTATION
ARTICLE 10.1 RIGHT TO REPRESENTATION

This Article shall not be construed to make discipline, transfers, promotions, or probationary
employee terminations grievable or arbitrable. It is mutually agreed that the provisions of
this Article do not limit what the law requires. The right to representation during the
investigation and adjudication of misconduct, categorical use of force investigation, an
administrative appeal and grievance presentation is not to be denied to any employee.

Any interview of an employee in connection with an investigation that the employee
reasonably believes may result in disciplinary action against the employee, will entitle the
employee to a representative of the employee's choice. The employee has the right to
choose a representative, subject only to reasonable consideration of the representative's
availability and the urgency of the investigation. The representative may be a member of
the Department from the rank of lieutenant or below, or legal counsel (at the employee's

-93-
expense), or both. A Director of the League shall not be required to disclose, nor be
subject to any punitive action for refusing to disclose, any non-criminal information received
from any employee under investigation or obtained as a representative of that employee in
relation to employment matters. This does not apply if the Director is a percipient witness
to criminal acts under investigation.

All references to "on-duty representation" in Section 10.0 of this MOU shall refer to those
representatives who are currently Department employees, excluding Directors of the
League and any employee who represents him or herself. There is no provision for the use
of on-duty time or overtime for an accused employee or grievant to prepare a defense or
grievance initiation or appeal.

ARTICLE 10.2 PERSONNEL COMPLAINT INTERVIEW REPRESENTATIVE

Employees have the right to representation during an interview pursuant to a personnel
complaint investigation or a "special" investigation. The duties of a representative in these
interviews are:

A. To conduct pre-interview consultation with the employee to ascertain if the employee
understands the allegations against the employee; and

B. To be present with the employee during the interview for purposes of:

Consultation,

Advice,

Clarification,

Ensuring procedures are followed, and
Ensuring the employee's rights are not violated.

ARWON>

Representation shall be on an on-duty basis. When on-duty representation is impractical,
the Department may use an adjusted work schedule. Such representation shall not be done
onan overtime basis unless no other alternative is available and such overtime is approved
by a supervisor.

The provisions of this Article shall apply to an employee who is being interviewed as a
witness pursuant to a personnel complaint investigation or "special" investigation if the
employee has a reasonable belief that the employee may be disciplined as a result of the
investigation.

On-duty personnel selected as a representative shall obtain the approval of a supervisor
before leaving their assigned duties. Permission shall not be denied unless deployment
would be seriously affected or vitally important duties neglected. If this causes a delay for
the employee in retaining the representative of the employee's choice, the interview will be
rescheduled.

-94-
ARTICLE 10.3 SKELLY/EMPLOYEE INVESTIGATION REVIEW
REPRESENTATIVE

The Skelly or Employee Investigation Review process is the last opportunity for an
employee to discuss the investigation and/or rebut charges or present additional evidence
on the employee's own behalf, if the employee so chooses, prior to the commanding officer
submitting recommendations for disposition of a personnel complaint. The duties of a
representative in the Skelly or Employee Investigation Review hearing are:

A. To explain the process to the involved employee;

B. To represent the employee during interviews with the commanding officer;

Cc. To assist in formulating any rebuttal or requests for reinvestigation of the complaint;
D. To counsel the employee regarding alternatives in the disciplinary process.

Skelly Response. The employee shall be given a reasonable period of time to consider
and prepare a Skelly response. When the regular duties of a Skelly representative prevent
him from assisting an accused officer in preparing his response, a continuance, if
requested, shall be granted for a reasonable period of time, provided such period of time
shall not jeopardize the statute of limitations.

Employee Investigation Review Response. The employee shall have 30 calendar days
following service of the Employee Investigation Review, Form 1.88.1, within which to submit
a response if the employee so chooses. An Employee Investigation Review representative
may assist an employee in preparing a response.

A Skelly or Employee Investigation Review representative shall be on-duty or use an
adjusted work schedule. Such representation shall not be done on an overtime basis,
unless no other alternative is available.

Note: Should a Skelly or Employee Investigation Review representative undertake an
investigation, it is not with the Department's sanction and shall not be on City time nor with
City equipment.

The term "Skelly" in this Article and elsewhere in this MOU is used solely to identify the
procedure used by the Department in the administration of disciplinary actions. The use of
that term does not imply a concession by the League that the Department's predisciplinary
procedures meet the standards of constitutional due process.

-95-
ARTICLE 10.4 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL REPRESENTATIVE

When an employee requests an administrative appeal hearing pursuant to Section 9.0, the
employee has a right to an administrative appeal representative.

A. An employee may not serve as an administrative appeal representative until
selected by the accused employee following service of a notice as specified in
Section 9.0.

B. The administrative appeal representative shall be on an on-duty basis while

investigating the case and representing the employee. Overtime may only be
worked with prior approval of the Officer-in-Charge of the representative. Such
overtime approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.

ARTICLE 10.5 GRIEVANCE REPRESENTATIVE
Employees have the right to raise and pursue grievances concerning wages, hours and

other terms and conditions of employment. It is recognized that the employee has a right to
representation in that process. The duties of the representative include:

A. To identify issues, facts, and appropriate procedures for the employee;
B. To assist the employee in formulating written responses;
Cc. To be present and represent the employee in the grievance process.

The representative is considered on duty only when representing the grievant when the
grievance is being discussed with Management.

When on-duty representation is impracticable, the representative shall use an adjusted
work schedule. Such representation shall not be done on an overtime basis unless no other
alternative is available.

ARTICLE 10.6 CONDUCT OF ALL REPRESENTATIVES; DEPARTMENT
SUPPORT

A. A representative shall use every legal means available and exercise the best efforts
to represent the employee.

B. Employees who are representatives may use Department facilities and resources to
the extent reasonably necessary in assisting in the Skelly or appeal of the employee.
This shall include reasonable logistical support for the Skelly or administrative
appeal investigation. The Department is under no obligation to provide logistical
support for an employee who represents him or her self as all preparation must be
done on an off-duty basis.

-96-
Representatives in conducting investigations and interviews shall identify
themselves as such representatives.

All Department employees have an obligation to cooperate with other Department

employees who are representatives for the employee or the Department and to
answer their questions responsively.

-97-
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused their duly authorized
representatives to execute this Memorandum of Understanding the day, month and year

above written.

Los Angeles Police Protective
League sentatives:

Cb

Paul M. Weber
President

City of Los Angeles
Management Representatives:

Laat l Pw fie

is A. Santana
City Administrative Officer

 

Scott Rate, Director

Charlie Beck, Chief of Police

 

Julian Melendez, Director

Enrique Hernandez, General Counsel

Jeff Hart, Delegate

John W. Mack
President, Police Commission

Approved as to form:

 

Michael Jolicoeur, Delegate

Nr Ro Ono

City Attorney

o-AA-1

 

Gregory Stearns, Delegate

Date
POLICE OFFICERS UNIT
APPENDIX A-1
OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

Code Class and Pay Grade Schedule
2214-1 Police Officer | A-1
2217 Police Specialist * A-2
2214-2 Police Officer II A-2
2214-3 Police Officer II! 3
2223-1 Police Detective | 5
2223-2 Police Detective I! 6
2223-3 Police Detective III 8
2227-1 Police Sergeant | 6
2227-2 Police Sergeant II 7
2232-1 Police Lieutenant | 9
2232-2 Police Lieutenant II 10

Biweekly/Monthly Longevity Compensation for Police Officers:

Years of Service Completed Biweekly Monthly
10 years and less than 15 years $84.00 $182.70
15 years and less than 20 years $168.80 $367.14
20 years of service and over $252.80 $549.84

Salary Tables:
Appendix A-2 Regular Pay
Appendix A-3 Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives

* Police Specialist (Schedule A-2) The regular pay for this class is a salary range from PO-I to the top
step of PO-Il and is dependent upon the member's education and experience. Individuals in this
class may receive any POST bonus and/or Uniform Field Officers Incentive if so qualified.

- 99 -
CLASS
SCHEDULE

PO-&ll

A

PO-|

PO-II

PO-III

DET-I

DET-II

SGT-I

SGT-II

DET-III

LT-

LT-II

10

11

12

HR
BW
MO
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

21.66
1732.80
3768.84

45226.08

27.07
2165.60
4710.18

56522.16

REGULAR PAY

4

24.72
1977.60
4301.28

51615.36

30.90
2472.00
5376.60

64519.20

32.59
2607.20
5670.66

68047.92

34.42
2753.60
5989.08

APPENDIX A-2
OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011
2 3
22.53 23.41
1802.40 1872.80
3920.22 4073.34
47042.64 48880.08
28.16 29.26
2252.80 2340.80
4899.84 5091.24
58798.08 61094.88
29.26 30.90
2340.80 2472.00
5091.24 5376.60
61094.88 64519.20
30.90 32.59
2472.00 2607.20
5376.60 5670.66
64519.20 68047.92

71868.96

36.34
2907.20
6323.16

75877.92

38.35
3068.00
6672.90

80074.80

27.07
2165.60
4710.18

56522.16

32.59
2607.20
5670.66

68047.92

34.42
2753.60
5989.08

71868.96

36.34
2907.20
6323.16

75877.92

38.35,
3068.00
6672.90

80074.80

40.55
3244.00
7055.70

84668.40

42.78
3422.40
7443.72

89324.64

45.15,
3612.00
7856.10

94273.20

47.68
3814.40
8296.32

99555.84

50.34
4027.20
8759.16

105109.92

53.14
4251.20
9246.36

110956.32

56.09
4487.20
9759.66

117115.92

59.20
4736.00
10300.80
123609.60

28.16
2252.80
4899.84

58798.08

34.42
2753.60
5989.08

71868.96

36.34
2907.20
6323.16

75877.92

38.35,
3068.00
6672.90

80074.80

40.55,
3244.00
7055.70

84668.40

42.78
3422.40
7443.72

89324.64

45.15
3612.00
7856.10

94273.20

47.68
3814.40
8296.32

99555.84

50.34
4027.20
8759.16

105109.92

53.14
4251.20
9246.36

110956.32

56.09
4487.20
9759.66

117115.92

59.20
4736.00
10300.80
123609.60

62.47
4997.60
10869.78
130437.36

29.26
2340.80
5091.24

61094.88

36.34
2907.20
6323.16

75877.92

38.35,
3068.00
6672.90

80074.80

40.55,
3244.00
7055.70

84668.40

42.78
3422.40
7443.72

89324.64

45.15,
3612.00
7856.10

94273.20

47.68
3814.40
8296.32

99555.84

50.34
4027.20
8759.16

105109.92

53.14
4251.20
9246.36

110956.32

56.09
4487.20
9759.66

117115.92

59.20
4736.00
10300.80
123609.60

62.47
4997.60
10869.78
130437.36

65.95,
5276.00
11475.30
137703.60

 

- 100 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX A-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-I&ll_ Regular Pay HR 21.66 22.53 23.41 24.72 27.07 28.16 29.26
A BW 1732.80 1802.40 1872.80 1977.60 2165.60 2252.80 2340.80
MO 3768.84 3920.22 4073.34 4301.28 4710.18 4899.84 5091.24
YR 45226.08 47042.64 48880.08 51615.36 56522.16 58798.08 61094.88
A POST Basic HR 0.65 0.68 0.70 0.74 0.81 0.84 0.88
BW 52.00 54.40 56.00 59.20 64.80 67.20 70.40
MO 113.10 118.32 121.80 128.76 140.94 146.16 153.12
YR 1357.20 1419.84 1461.60 1545.12 1691.28 1753.92 1837.44
A POST Intermediate HR 0.22 0.23 0.23 0.25 0.27 0.28 0.29
BW 17.60 18.40 18.40 20.00 21.60 22.40 23.20
MO 38.28 40.02 40.02 43.50 46.98 48.72 50.46
YR 459.36 480.24 480.24 522.00 563.76 584.64 605.52
A POST Advanced HR 0.43 0.45 0.47 0.49 0.54 0.56 0.59
BW 34.40 36.00 37.60 39.20 43.20 44.80 47.20
MO 74.82 78.30 81.78 85.26 93.96 97.44 102.66
YR 897.84 939.60 981.36 1023.12 1127.52 1169.28 1231.92
A Uniform Incentive HR 0.65 0.68 0.70 0.74 0.81 0.84 0.88
BW 52.00 54.40 56.00 59.20 64.80 67.20 70.40
MO 113.10 118.32 121.80 128.76 140.94 146.16 153.12
YR 1357.20 1419.84 1461.60 1545.12 1691.28 1753.92 1837.44
PO-I Regular Pay HR 27.07 28.16 29.26 30.90 32.59 34.42 36.34
1 BW 2165.60 2252.80 2340.80 2472.00 2607.20 2753.60 2907.20
MO 4710.18 4899.84 5091.24 5376.60 5670.66 5989.08 6323.16
YR 56522.16 58798.08 61094.88 64519.20 68047.92 71868.96 75877.92
1 POST Basic HR 0.81 0.84 0.88 0.93 0.98 1.03 1.09
BW 64.80 67.20 70.40 74.40 78.40 82.40 87.20
MO 140.94 146.16 153.12 161.82 170.52 179.22 189.66
YR 1691.28 1753.92 1837.44 1941.84 2046.24 2150.64 2275.92
1 POST Intermediate HR 0.27 0.28 0.29 0.31 0.33 0.34 0.36
BW 21.60 22.40 23.20 24.80 26.40 27.20 28.80
MO 46.98 48.72 50.46 53.94 57.42 59.16 62.64
YR 563.76 584.64 605.52 647.28 689.04 709.92 751.68
1 POST Advanced HR 0.54 0.56 0.59 0.62 0.65 0.69 0.73
BW 43.20 44.80 47.20 49.60 52.00 55.20 58.40
MO 93.96 97.44 102.66 107.88 113.10 120.06 127.02
YR 1127.52 1169.28 1231.92 1294.56 1357.20 1440.72 1524.24
1 Uniform Incentive HR 0.81 0.84 0.88 0.93 0.98 1.03 1.09
BW 64.80 67.20 70.40 74.40 78.40 82.40 87.20
MO 140.94 146.16 153.12 161.82 170.52 179.22 189.66
YR 1691.28 1753.92 1837.44 1941.84 2046.24 2150.64 2275.92

 

- 101 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX A-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-II Regular Pay HR 29.26 30.90 32.59 34.42 36.34 38.35
2 BW 2340.80 2472.00 2607.20 2753.60 2907.20 3068.00
MO 5091.24 5376.60 5670.66 5989.08 6323.16 6672.90
YR 61094.88 64519.20 68047.92 71868.96 75877.92 80074.80
2 POST Basic HR 0.88 0.93 0.98 1.03 1.09 1.15
BW 70.40 74.40 78.40 82.40 87.20 92.00
MO 153.12 161.82 170.52 179.22 189.66 200.10
YR 1837.44 1941.84 2046.24 2150.64 2275.92 2401.20
2 POST Intermediate HR 0.29 0.31 0.33 0.34 0.36 0.38
BW 23.20 24.80 26.40 27.20 28.80 30.40
MO 50.46 53.94 57.42 59.16 62.64 66.12
YR 605.52 647.28 689.04 709.92 751.68 793.44
2 POST Advanced HR 0.59 0.62 0.65 0.69 0.73 0.77
BW 47.20 49.60 52.00 55.20 58.40 61.60
MO 102.66 107.88 113.10 120.06 127.02 133.98
YR 1231.92 1294.56 1357.20 1440.72 1524.24 1607.76
2 Uniform Incentive HR 0.88 0.93 0.98 1.03 1.09 1.15
BW 70.40 74.40 78.40 82.40 87.20 92.00
MO 153.12 161.82 170.52 179.22 189.66 200.10
YR 1837.44 1941.84 2046.24 2150.64 2275.92 2401.20
PO-III_ Regular Pay HR 30.90 32.59 34.42 36.34 38.35 40.55,
3 BW 2472.00 2607.20 2753.60 2907.20 3068.00 3244.00
MO 5376.60 5670.66 5989.08 6323.16 6672.90 7055.70
YR 64519.20 68047.92 71868.96 75877.92 80074.80 84668.40
3 POST Basic HR 0.93 0.98 1.03 1.09 1.15 1.22
BW 74.40 78.40 82.40 87.20 92.00 97.60
MO 161.82 170.52 179.22 189.66 200.10 212.28
YR 1941.84 2046.24 2150.64 2275.92 2401.20 2547.36
3 POST Intermediate HR 0.31 0.33 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.41
BW 24.80 26.40 27.20 28.80 30.40 32.80
MO 53.94 57.42 59.16 62.64 66.12 71.34
YR 647.28 689.04 709.92 751.68 793.44 856.08
3 POST Advanced HR 0.62 0.65 0.69 0.73 0.77 0.81
BW 49.60 52.00 55.20 58.40 61.60 64.80
MO 107.88 113.10 120.06 127.02 133.98 140.94
YR 1294.56 1357.20 1440.72 1524.24 1607.76 1691.28
3 Uniform Incentive HR 0.93 0.98 1.03 1.09 1.15 1.22
BW 74.40 78.40 82.40 87.20 92.00 97.60
MO 161.82 170.52 179.22 189.66 200.10 212.28
YR 1941.84 2046.24 2150.64 2275.92 2401.20 2547.36

 

- 102 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX A-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO Ill
4 Regular Pay HR 36.34 38.35 40.55 42.78
BW 2907.20 3068.00 3244.00 3422.40
MO 6323.16 6672.90 7055.70 7443.72
YR 75877.92 80074.80 84668.40 89324.64
4 POST Basic HR 1.09 1.15 1.22 1.28
BW 87.20 92.00 97.60 102.40
MO 189.66 200.10 212.28 222.72
YR 2275.92 2401.20 2547.36 2672.64
4 POST Intermediate HR 0.36 0.38 0.41 0.43
BW 28.80 30.40 32.80 34.40
MO 62.64 66.12 71.34 74.82
YR 751.68 793.44 856.08 897.84
4 POST Advanced HR 0.73 0.77 0.81 0.86
BW 58.40 61.60 64.80 68.80
MO 127.02 133.98 140.94 149.64
YR 1524.24 1607.76 1691.28 1795.68
4 Uniform Incentive HR 1.09 1.15 1.22 1.28
BW 87.20 92.00 97.60 102.40
MO 189.66 200.10 212.28 222.72
YR 2275.92 2401.20 2547.36 2672.64
DET-I Regular Pay HR 38.35 40.55 42.78 45.15
5 BW 3068.00 3244.00 3422.40 3612.00
MO 6672.90 7055.70 7443.72 7856.10
YR 80074.80 84668.40 89324.64 94273.20
5 POST Basic HR 1.15 1.22 1.28 1.35
BW 92.00 97.60 102.40 108.00
MO 200.10 212.28 222.72 234.90
YR 2401.20 2547.36 2672.64 2818.80
5 POST Intermediate HR 0.38 0.41 0.43 0.45
BW 30.40 32.80 34.40 36.00
MO 66.12 71.34 74.82 78.30
YR 793.44 856.08 897.84 939.60
5 POST Advanced HR 0.77 0.81 0.86 0.90
BW 61.60 64.80 68.80 72.00
MO 133.98 140.94 149.64 156.60
YR 1607.76 1691.28 1795.68 1879.20
5 Uniform Incentive HR 1.15 1.22 1.28 1.35
BW 92.00 97.60 102.40 108.00
MO 200.10 212.28 222.72 234.90
YR 2401.20 2547.36 2672.64 2818.80
5 Detective Incentive HR 0.38 0.41 0.43 0.45
BW 30.40 32.80 34.40 36.00
MO 66.12 71.34 74.82 78.30
YR 793.44 856.08 897.84 939.60

 

- 103 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX A-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-Il_ Regular Pay HR 42.78 45.15 47.68
SGT-I BW 3422.40 3612.00 3814.40
6 MO 7443.72 7856.10 8296.32
YR 89324.64 94273.20 99555.84
6 POST Basic HR 1.28 1.35 1.43
BW 102.40 108.00 114.40
MO 222.72 234.90 248.82
YR 2672.64 2818.80 2985.84
6 POST Intermediate HR 0.43 0.45 0.48
BW 34.40 36.00 38.40
MO 74.82 78.30 83.52
YR 897.84 939.60 1002.24
6 POST Advanced HR 0.86 0.90 0.95
BW 68.80 72.00 76.00
MO 149.64 156.60 165.30
YR 1795.68 1879.20 1983.60
6 Uniform Incentive HR 1.28 1.35 1.43
BW 102.40 108.00 114.40
MO 222.72 234.90 248.82
YR 2672.64 2818.80 2985.84
6 Detective Incentive HR 0.43 0.45 0.48
BW 34.40 36.00 38.40
MO 74.82 78.30 83.52
YR 897.84 939.60 1002.24
SGT-II_ Regular Pay HR 45.15 47.68 50.34
7 BW 3612.00 3814.40 4027.20
MO 7856.10 8296.32 8759.16
YR 94273.20 99555.84 105109.92
7 POST Basic HR 1.35 1.43 1.51
BW 108.00 114.40 120.80
MO 234.90 248.82 262.74
YR 2818.80 2985.84 3152.88
7 POST Intermediate HR 0.45 0.48 0.50
BW 36.00 38.40 40.00
MO 78.30 83.52 87.00
YR 939.60 1002.24 1044.00
7 POST Advanced HR 0.90 0.95 1.01
BW 72.00 76.00 80.80
MO 156.60 165.30 175.74
YR 1879.20 1983.60 2108.88
7 Uniform Incentive HR 1.35 1.43 1.51
BW 108.00 114.40 120.80
MO 234.90 248.82 262.74
YR 2818.80 2985.84 3152.88

 

- 104 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX A-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 47.68 50.34 53.14
8 BW 3814.40 4027.20 4251.20
MO 8296.32 8759.16 9246.36
YR 99555.84 105109.92 110956.32
8 POST Basic HR 1.43 1.51 1.59
BW 114.40 120.80 127.20
MO 248.82 262.74 276.66
YR 2985.84 3152.88 3319.92
8 POST Intermediate HR 0.48 0.50 0.53
BW 38.40 40.00 42.40
MO 83.52 87.00 92.22
YR 1002.24 1044.00 1106.64
8 POST Advanced HR 0.95 1.01 1.06
BW 76.00 80.80 84.80
MO 165.30 175.74 184.44
YR 1983.60 2108.88 2213.28
8 Uniform Incentive HR 1.43 1.51 1.59
BW 114.40 120.80 127.20
MO 248.82 262.74 276.66
YR 2985.84 3152.88 3319.92
8 Detective Incentive HR 0.48 0.50 0.53
BW 38.40 40.00 42.40
MO 83.52 87.00 92.22
YR 1002.24 1044.00 1106.64
LT-I Regular Pay HR 50.34 53.14 56.09
9 BW 4027.20 4251.20 4487.20
MO 8759.16 9246.36 9759.66
YR 105109.92 110956.32 117115.92
9 POST Basic HR 151 1.59 1.68
BW 120.80 127.20 134.40
MO 262.74 276.66 292.32
YR 3152.88 3319.92 3507.84
9 POST Intermediate HR 0.50 0.53 0.56
BW 40.00 42.40 44.80
MO 87.00 92.22 97.44
YR 1044.00 1106.64 1169.28
9 POST Advanced HR 1.01 1.06 1.12
BW 80.80 84.80 89.60
MO 175.74 184.44 194.88
YR 2108.88 2213.28 2338.56
9 Uniform Incentive HR 1.51 1.59 1.68
BW 120.80 127.20 134.40
MO 262.74 276.66 292.32
YR 3152.88 3319.92 3507.84

 

- 105 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX A-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
LT-II Regular Pay HR 53.14 56.09 59.20
10 BW 4251.20 4487.20 4736.00
MO 9246.36 9759.66 10300.80
YR 110956.32 117115.92 123609.60
10 POST Basic HR 1.59 1.68 1.78
BW 127.20 134.40 142.40
MO 276.66 292.32 309.72
YR 3319.92 3507.84 3716.64
10 POST Intermediate HR 0.53 0.56 0.59
BW 42.40 44.80 47.20
MO 92.22 97.44 102.66
YR 1106.64 1169.28 1231.92
10 POST Advanced HR 1.06 1.12 1.18
BW 84.80 89.60 94.40
MO 184.44 194.88 205.32
YR 2213.28 2338.56 2463.84
10 Uniform Incentive HR 1.59 1.68 1.78
BW 127.20 134.40 142.40
MO 276.66 292.32 309.72
YR 3319.92 3507.84 3716.64
LT
11 Regular Pay HR 56.09 59.20 62.47
BW 4487.20 4736.00 4997.60
MO 9759.66 10300.80 10869.78
YR 117115.92 123609.60 130437.36
11 POST Basic HR 1.68 1.78 1.87
BW 134.40 142.40 149.60
MO 292.32 309.72 325.38
YR 3507.84 3716.64 3904.56
11 POST Intermediate HR 0.56 0.59 0.62
BW 44.80 47.20 49.60
MO 97.44 102.66 107.88
YR 1169.28 1231.92 1294.56
11 POST Advanced HR 1.12 1.18 1.25
BW 89.60 94.40 100.00
MO 194.88 205.32 217.50
YR 2338.56 2463.84 2610.00
11 Uniform Incentive HR 1.68 1.78 1.87
BW 134.40 142.40 149.60
MO 292.32 309.72 325.38
YR 3507.84 3716.64 3904.56

 

- 106 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX A-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2011

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

LT

12 Regular Pay HR 59.20 62.47 65.95
BW 4736.00 4997.60 5276.00
MO 10300.80 10869.78 11475.30
YR 123609.60 130437.36 137703.60

12 POST Basic HR 1.78 1.87 1.98
BW 142.40 149.60 158.40
MO 309.72 325.38 344.52
YR 3716.64 3904.56 4134.24

12 POST Intermediate HR 0.59 0.62 0.66
BW 47.20 49.60 52.80
MO 102.66 107.88 114.84
YR 1231.92 1294.56 1378.08

12 POST Advanced HR 1.18 1.25 1.32
BW 94.40 100.00 105.60
MO 205.32 217.50 229.68
YR 2463.84 2610.00 2756.16

12 Uniform Incentive HR 1.78 1.87 1.98
BW 142.40 149.60 158.40
MO 309.72 325.38 344.52
YR 3716.64 3904.56 4134.24

 

- 107 -
POLICE OFFICERS UNIT
APPENDIX B-1
OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

Code Class and Pay Grade Schedule
2214-1 Police Officer | A-1
2217 Police Specialist * A-2
2214-2 Police Officer II A-2
2214-3 Police Officer II! 3
2223-1 Police Detective | 5
2223-2 Police Detective I! 6
2223-3 Police Detective III 8
2227-1 Police Sergeant | 6
2227-2 Police Sergeant II 7
2232-1 Police Lieutenant | 9
2232-2 Police Lieutenant II 10

Biweekly/Monthly Longevity Compensation for Police Officers:

Years of Service Completed Biweekly Monthly
10 years and less than 15 years $87.20 $189.66
15 years and less than 20 years $173.60 $377.58
20 years of service and over $260.80 $567.24

Salary Tables:
Appendix B-2 Regular Pay
Appendix B-3 Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives

* Police Specialist (Schedule A-2) The regular pay for this class is a salary range from PO-I to the top
step of PO-Il and is dependent upon the member's education and experience. Individuals in this
class may receive any POST bonus and/or Uniform Field Officers Incentive if so qualified.

- 108 -
REGULAR PAY

APPENDIX B-2
OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011
1 2 3 4 5 6 7

CLASS PO-| &Il HR 22.31 23.21 24.11 25.46 27.88 29.00 30.14
SCHEDULE A BW 1784.80 1856.80 1928.80 2036.80 2230.40 2320.00 2411.20
MO 3881.94 4038.54 4195.14 4430.04 4851.12 5046.00 5244.36

YR 46583.28 48462.48 50341.68 53160.48 58213.44 60552.00 62932.32

PO-I HR 27.88 29.00 30.14 31.83 33.57 35.45, 37.43
1 BW 2230.40 2320.00 2411.20 2546.40 2685.60 2836.00 2994.40
MO. 4851.12 5046.00 5244.36 5538.42 5841.18 6168.30 6512.82

YR 58213.44 60552.00 62932.32 66461.04 70094.16 74019.60 78153.84

PO-II HR 30.14 31.83 33.57 35.45, 37.43 39.50
2 BW 2411.20 2546.40 2685.60 2836.00 2994.40 3160.00
MO. 5244.36 5538.42 5841.18 6168.30 6512.82 6873.00

YR 62932.32 66461.04 70094.16 74019.60 78153.84 82476.00

PO-III HR 31.83 33.57 35.45 37.43 39.50 41.77
3 BW 2546.40 2685.60 2836.00 2994.40 3160.00 3341.60
MO. 5538.42 5841.18 6168.30 6512.82 6873.00 7267.98

YR 66461.04 70094.16 74019.60 78153.84 82476.00 87215.76

4 HR 37.43 39.50 41.77 44.06
BW 2994.40 3160.00 3341.60 3524.80

MO. 6512.82 6873.00 7267.98 7666.44

YR 78153.84 82476.00 87215.76 91997.28

DET-I HR 39.50 41.77 44.06 46.50
5 BW 3160.00 3341.60 3524.80 3720.00
MO. 6873.00 7267.98 7666.44 8091.00

YR 82476.00 87215.76 91997.28 97092.00

DET-II HR 44.06 46.50 49.11
SGT-I BW 3524.80 3720.00 3928.80
6 MO. 7666.44 8091.00 8545.14
YR 91997.28 97092.00 102541.68

SGT-II HR 46.50 49.11 51.85
7 BW 3720.00 3928.80 4148.00
MO. 8091.00 8545.14 9021.90

YR 97092.00 102541.68  108262.80

DET-III HR 49.11 51.85, 54.73
8 BW 3928.80 4148.00 4378.40
MO. 8545.14 9021.90 9523.02

YR 102541.68  108262.80 114276.24

LT- HR 51.85, 54.73 57.77
9 BW 4148.00 4378.40 4621.60
MO. 9021.90 9523.02 10051.98

YR 108262.80 114276.24  120623.76

LT-II HR 54.73 57.77 60.98
10 BW 4378.40 4621.60 4878.40
MO. 9523.02 10051.98 10610.52

YR 114276.24  120623.76 127326.24

11 HR 57.77 60.98 64.34
BW 4621.60 4878.40 5147.20

MO 10051.98 10610.52 11195.16

YR 120623.76  127326.24  134341.92

12 HR 60.98 64.34 67.93
BW 4878.40 5147.20 5434.40

MO 10610.52 11195.16 11819.82

YR 127326.24 134341.92 141837.84

 

- 109 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX B-3 OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-I&ll_ Regular Pay HR 22.31 23.21 24.11 25.46 27.88 29.00 30.14
A BW 1784.80 1856.80 1928.80 2036.80 2230.40 2320.00 2411.20
MO 3881.94 4038.54 4195.14 4430.04 4851.12 5046.00 5244.36
YR 46583.28 48462.48 50341.68 53160.48 58213.44 60552.00 62932.32
A POST Intermediate HR 0.22 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.28 0.29 0.30
BW 17.60 18.40 19.20 20.00 22.40 23.20 24.00
MO 38.28 40.02 41.76 43.50 48.72 50.46 52.20
YR 459.36 480.24 501.12 522.00 584.64 605.52 626.40
A POST Advanced HR 0.45, 0.46 0.48 0.51 0.56 0.58 0.60
BW 36.00 36.80 38.40 40.80 44.80 46.40 48.00
MO 78.30 80.04 83.52 88.74 97.44 100.92 104.40
YR 939.60 960.48 1002.24 1064.88 1169.28 1211.04 1252.80
A Uniform Incentive HR 0.67 0.70 0.72 0.76 0.84 0.87 0.90
BW 53.60 56.00 57.60 60.80 67.20 69.60 72.00
MO 116.58 121.80 125.28 132.24 146.16 151.38 156.60
YR 1398.96 1461.60 1503.36 1586.88 1753.92 1816.56 1879.20
PO-I Regular Pay HR 27.88 29.00 30.14 31.83 33.57 35.45 37.43
1 BW 2230.40 2320.00 2411.20 2546.40 2685.60 2836.00 2994.40
MO 4851.12 5046.00 5244.36 5538.42 5841.18 6168.30 6512.82
YR  58213.44 60552.00 62932.32 66461.04 70094.16 74019.60 78153.84
1 POST Intermediate HR 0.28 0.29 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.35 0.37
BW 22.40 23.20 24.00 25.60 27.20 28.00 29.60
MO 48.72 50.46 52.20 55.68. 59.16 60.90 64.38
YR 584.64 605.52 626.40 668.16 709.92 730.80 772.56
1 POST Advanced HR 0.56 0.58 0.60 0.64 0.67 0.71 0.75
BW 44.80 46.40 48.00 51.20 53.60 56.80 60.00
MO 97.44 100.92 104.40 111.36 116.58 123.54 130.50
YR 1169.28 1211.04 1252.80 1336.32 1398.96 1482.48 1566.00
1 Uniform Incentive HR 0.84 0.87 0.90 0.95 1.01 1.06 1.12
BW 67.20 69.60 72.00 76.00 80.80 84.80 89.60
MO 146.16 151.38 156.60 165.30 175.74 184.44 194.88
YR 1753.92 1816.56 1879.20 1983.60 2108.88 2213.28 2338.56

 

- 110 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX B-3 OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-II Regular Pay HR 30.14 31.83 33.57 35.45 37.43 39.50
2 BW 2411.20 2546.40 2685.60 2836.00 2994.40 3160.00
MO 5244.36 5538.42 5841.18 6168.30 6512.82 6873.00
YR 62932.32 66461.04 70094.16 74019.60 78153.84 82476.00
2 POST Intermediate HR 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.35 0.37 0.40
BW 24.00 25.60 27.20 28.00 29.60 32.00
MO 52.20 55.68 59.16 60.90 64.38 69.60
YR 626.40 668.16 709.92 730.80 772.56 835.20
2 POST Advanced HR 0.60 0.64 0.67 0.71 0.75 0.79
BW 48.00 51.20 53.60 56.80 60.00 63.20
MO 104.40 111.36 116.58 123.54 130.50 137.46
YR 1252.80 1336.32 1398.96 1482.48 1566.00 1649.52
2 Uniform Incentive HR 0.90 0.95 1.01 1.06 1.12 1.19
BW 72.00 76.00 80.80 84.80 89.60 95.20
MO 156.60 165.30 175.74 184.44 194.88 207.06
YR 1879.20 1983.60 2108.88 2213.28 2338.56 2484.72
PO-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 31.83 33.57 35.45, 37.43 39.50 41.77
3 BW 2546.40 2685.60 2836.00 2994.40 3160.00 3341.60
MO 5538.42 5841.18 6168.30 6512.82 6873.00 7267.98
YR 66461.04 70094.16 74019.60 78153.84 82476.00 87215.76
3 POST Intermediate HR 0.32 0.34 0.35 0.37 0.40 0.42
BW 25.60 27.20 28.00 29.60 32.00 33.60
MO 55.68 59.16 60.90 64.38 69.60 73.08
YR 668.16 709.92 730.80 772.56 835.20 876.96
3 POST Advanced HR 0.64 0.67 0.71 0.75 0.79 0.84
BW 51.20 53.60 56.80 60.00 63.20 67.20
MO 111.36 116.58 123.54 130.50 137.46 146.16
YR 1336.32 1398.96 1482.48 1566.00 1649.52 1753.92
3 Uniform Incentive HR 0.95 1.01 1.06 1.12 1.19 1.25
BW 76.00 80.80 84.80 89.60 95.20 100.00
MO 165.30 175.74 184.44 194.88 207.06 217.50
YR 1983.60 2108.88 2213.28 2338.56 2484.72 2610.00

 

- 111 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX B-3 OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO Ill
4 Regular Pay HR 37.43 39.50, 41.77 44.06
BW 2994.40 3160.00 3341.60 3524.80
MO 6512.82 6873.00 7267.98 7666.44
YR 78153.84 82476.00 87215.76 91997.28
4 POST Intermediate HR 0.37 0.40 0.42 0.44
BW 29.60 32.00 33.60 35.20
MO 64.38 69.60 73.08 76.56
YR 772.56 835.20 876.96 918.72
4 POST Advanced HR 0.75 0.79 0.84 0.88
BW 60.00 63.20 67.20 70.40
MO 130.50 137.46 146.16 153.12
YR 1566.00 1649.52 1753.92 1837.44
4 Uniform Incentive HR 1.12 1.19 1.25 1.32
BW 89.60 95.20 100.00 105.60
MO 194.88 207.06 217.50 229.68
YR 2338.56 2484.72 2610.00 2756.16
DET-I Regular Pay HR 39.50 41.77 44.06 46.50
5 BW 3160.00 3341.60 3524.80 3720.00
MO 6873.00 7267.98 7666.44 8091.00
YR 82476.00 87215.76 91997.28 97092.00
5 POST Intermediate HR 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.47
BW 32.00 33.60 35.20 37.60
MO 69.60 73.08 76.56 81.78
YR 835.20 876.96 918.72 981.36
5 POST Advanced HR 0.79 0.84 0.88 0.93
BW 63.20 67.20 70.40 74.40
MO 137.46 146.16 153.12 161.82
YR 1649.52 1753.92 1837.44 1941.84
5 Uniform Incentive HR 1.19 1.25 1.32 1.40
BW 95.20 100.00 105.60 112.00
MO 207.06 217.50 229.68 243.60
YR 2484.72 2610.00 2756.16 2923.20
5 Detective Incentive HR 0.40 0.42 0.44 0.47
BW 32.00 33.60 35.20 37.60
MO 69.60 73.08 76.56 81.78
YR 835.20 876.96 918.72 981.36

 

- 112 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX B-3 OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-Il_ Regular Pay HR 44.06 46.50 49.11
SGT-I BW 3524.80 3720.00 3928.80
6 MO 7666.44 8091.00 8545.14
YR 91997.28 97092.00 102541.68
6 POST Intermediate HR 0.44 0.47 0.49
BW 35.20 37.60 39.20
MO 76.56 81.78 85.26
YR 918.72 981.36 1023.12
6 POST Advanced HR 0.88 0.93 0.98
BW 70.40 74.40 78.40
MO 153.12 161.82 170.52
YR 1837.44 1941.84 2046.24
6 Uniform Incentive HR 1.32 1.40 1.47
BW 105.60 112.00 117.60
MO 229.68 243.60 255.78
YR 2756.16 2923.20 3069.36
6 Detective Incentive HR 0.44 0.47 0.49
BW 35.20 37.60 39.20
MO 76.56 81.78 85.26
YR 918.72 981.36 1023.12
SGT-Il_ Regular Pay HR 46.50 49.11 51.85
7 BW 3720.00 3928.80 4148.00
MO 8091.00 8545.14 9021.90
YR 97092.00 102541.68 108262.80
7 POST Intermediate HR 0.47 0.49 0.52
BW 37.60 39.20 41.60
MO 81.78 85.26 90.48
YR 981.36 1023.12 1085.76
7 POST Advanced HR 0.93 0.98 1.04
BW 74.40 78.40 83.20
MO 161.82 170.52 180.96
YR 1941.84 2046.24 2171.52
7 Uniform Incentive HR 1.40 1.47 1.56
BW 112.00 117.60 124.80
MO 243.60 255.78 271.44
YR 2923.20 3069.36 3257.28

- 113 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX B-3 OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 49.11 51.85 54.73
8 BW 3928.80 4148.00 4378.40
MO 8545.14 9021.90 9523.02
YR 102541.68 108262.80 114276.24
8 POST Intermediate HR 0.49 0.52 0.55
BW 39.20 41.60 44.00
MO 85.26 90.48 95.70
YR 1023.12 1085.76 1148.40
8 POST Advanced HR 0.98 1.04 1.09
BW 78.40 83.20 87.20
MO 170.52 180.96 189.66
YR 2046.24 2171.52 2275.92
8 Uniform Incentive HR 1.47 1.56 1.64
BW 117.60 124.80 131.20
MO 255.78 271.44 285.36
YR 3069.36 3257.28 3424.32
8 Detective Incentive HR 0.49 0.52 0.55
BW 39.20 41.60 44.00
MO 85.26 90.48 95.70
YR 1023.12 1085.76 1148.40
LT-I Regular Pay HR 51.85 54.73 57.77
9 BW 4148.00 4378.40 4621.60
MO 9021.90 9523.02 10051.98
YR 108262.80 114276.24 120623.76
9 POST Intermediate HR 0.52 0.55 0.58
BW 41.60 44.00 46.40
MO 90.48 95.70 100.92
YR 1085.76 1148.40 1211.04
9 POST Advanced HR 1.04 1.09 1.16
BW 83.20 87.20 92.80
MO 180.96 189.66 201.84
YR 2171.52 2275.92 2422.08
9 Uniform Incentive HR 1.56 1.64 1.73
BW 124.80 131.20 138.40
MO 271.44 285.36 301.02
YR 3257.28 3424.32 3612.24

-114-
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX B-3 OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

 

2 5 6 7
LT-II Regular Pay HR 54.73 57.77 60.98
10 BW 4378.40 4621.60 4878.40
MO 9523.02 10051.98 10610.52
YR 114276.24 120623.76 127326.24
10 POST Intermediate HR 0.55 0.58 0.61
BW 44.00 46.40 48.80
MO 95.70 100.92 106.14
YR 1148.40 1211.04 1273.68
10 POST Advanced HR 1.09 1.16 1.22
BW 87.20 92.80 97.60
MO 189.66 201.84 212.28
YR 2275.92 2422.08 2547.36
10 Uniform Incentive HR 1.64 1.73 1.83
BW 131.20 138.40 146.40
MO 285.36 301.02 318.42
YR 3424.32 3612.24 3821.04
LT
11 Regular Pay HR 57.77 60.98 64.34
BW 4621.60 4878.40 5147.20
MO 10051.98 10610.52 11195.16
YR 120623.76 127326.24 134341.92
11 POST Intermediate HR 0.58 0.61 0.64
BW 46.40 48.80 51.20
MO 100.92 106.14 111.36
YR 1211.04 1273.68 1336.32
11 POST Advanced HR 1.16 1.22 1.29
BW 92.80 97.60 103.20
MO 201.84 212.28 224.46
YR 2422.08 2547.36 2693.52
11 Uniform Incentive HR 1.73 1.83 1.93
BW 138.40 146.40 154.40
MO 301.02 318.42 335.82
YR 3612.24 3821.04 4029.84

- 115 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX B-3 OPERATIVE SEPTEMBER 1, 2011

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

2 5 6 7

LT

12 Regular Pay HR 60.98 64.34 67.93
BW 4878.40 5147.20 5434.40
MO 10610.52 11195.16 11819.82
YR 127326.24 134341.92 141837.84

12 POST Intermediate HR 0.61 0.64 0.68
BW 48.80 51.20 54.40
MO 106.14 111.36 118.32
YR 1273.68 1336.32 1419.84

12 POST Advanced HR 1.22 1.29 1.36
BW 97.60 103.20 108.80
MO 212.28 224.46 236.64
YR 2547.36 2693.52 2839.68

12 Uniform Incentive HR 1.83 1.93 2.04
BW 146.40 154.40 163.20
MO 318.42 335.82 354.96
YR 3821.04 4029.84 4259.52

 

- 116 -
POLICE OFFICERS UNIT
APPENDIX C-1
OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

Code Class and Pay Grade Schedule
2214-1 Police Officer | A-1
2217 Police Specialist * A-2
2214-2 Police Officer II A-2
2214-3 Police Officer II! 3
2223-1 Police Detective | 5
2223-2 Police Detective I! 6
2223-3 Police Detective III 8
2227-1 Police Sergeant | 6
2227-2 Police Sergeant II 7
2232-1 Police Lieutenant | 9
2232-2 Police Lieutenant II 10

Biweekly/Monthly Longevity Compensation for Police Officers:

Years of Service Completed Biweekly Monthly
10 years and less than 15 years $88.00 $191.40
15 years and less than 20 years $175.20 $381.06
20 years of service and over $263.20 $572.46

Salary Tables:
Appendix C-2 Regular Pay
Appendix C-3 Regular Pay, plus POST Bonsues and Incentives

* Police Specialist (Schedule A-2) The regular pay for this class is a salary range from PO-I to the top
step of PO-Il and is dependent upon the member's education and experience. Individuals in this
class may receive any POST bonus and/or Uniform Field Officers Incentive if so qualified.

-117-
CLASS
SCHEDULE

PO-&ll

A

PO-|

PO-II

PO-III

DET-I

DET-II

SGT-I

SGT-II

DET-III

LT-

LT-II

10

11

12

HR
BW
MO
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

22.53
1802.40
3920.22

47042.64

28.16
2252.80
4899.84

58798.08

REGULAR PAY

4

25.71
2056.80
4473.54

53682.48

32.15
2572.00
5594.10

67129.20

33.91
2712.80
5900.34

70804.08

35.80
2864.00
6229.20

APPENDIX C-2
OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012
2 3
23.44 24.35
1875.20 1948.00
4078.56 4236.90
48942.72 50842.80
29.29 30.44
2343.20 2435.20
5096.46 5296.56
61157.52 63558.72
30.44 32.15
2435.20 2572.00
5296.56 5594.10
63558.72 67129.20
32.15 33.91
2572.00 2712.80
5594.10 5900.34
67129.20 70804.08

74750.40

37.80
3024.00
6577.20

78926.40

39.90
3192.00
6942.60

83311.20

28.16
2252.80
4899.84

58798.08

33.91
2712.80
5900.34

70804.08

35.80
2864.00
6229.20

74750.40

37.80
3024.00
6577.20

78926.40

39.90
3192.00
6942.60

83311.20

42.19
3375.20
7341.06

88092.72

44.50
3560.00
7743.00

92916.00

46.97
3757.60
8172.78

98073.36

49.60
3968.00
8630.40

103564.80

52.37
4189.60
9112.38

109348.56

55.28
4422.40
9618.72

115424.64

58.35,
4668.00
10152.90
121834.80

61.59
4927.20
10716.66
128599.92

29.29
2343.20
5096.46

61157.52

35.80
2864.00
6229.20

74750.40

37.80
3024.00
6577.20

78926.40

39.90
3192.00
6942.60

83311.20

42.19
3375.20
7341.06

88092.72

44.50
3560.00
7743.00

92916.00

46.97
3757.60
8172.78

98073.36

49.60
3968.00
8630.40

103564.80

52.37
4189.60
9112.38

109348.56

55.28
4422.40
9618.72

115424.64

58.35,
4668.00
10152.90
121834.80

61.59
4927.20
10716.66
128599.92

64.98
5198.40
11306.52
135678.24

30.44
2435.20
5296.56

63558.72

37.80
3024.00
6577.20

78926.40

39.90
3192.00
6942.60

83311.20

42.19
3375.20
7341.06

88092.72

44.50
3560.00
7743.00

92916.00

46.97
3757.60
8172.78

98073.36

49.60
3968.00
8630.40

103564.80

52.37
4189.60
9112.38

109348.56

55.28
4422.40
9618.72

115424.64

58.35
4668.00
10152.90
121834.80

61.59
4927.20
10716.66
128599.92

64.98
5198.40
11306.52
135678.24

68.61
5488.80
11938.14
143257.68

 

- 118 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX C-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-I&ll_ Regular Pay HR 22.53 23.44 24.35 25.71 28.16 29.29 30.44
A BW 1802.40 1875.20 1948.00 2056.80 2252.80 2343.20 2435.20
MO 3920.22 4078.56 4236.90 4473.54 4899.84 5096.46 5296.56
YR  47042.64 48942.72 50842.80 53682.48 58798.08 61157.52 63558.72
A POST Intermediate HR 0.23 0.23 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.29 0.30
BW 18.40 18.40 19.20 20.80 22.40 23.20 24.00
MO 40.02 40.02 41.76 45.24 48.72 50.46 52.20
YR 480.24 480.24 501.12 542.88 584.64 605.52 626.40
A POST Advanced HR 0.45, 0.47 0.49 0.51 0.56 0.59 0.61
BW 36.00 37.60 39.20 40.80 44.80 47.20 48.80
MO 78.30 81.78 85.26 88.74 97.44 102.66 106.14
YR 939.60 981.36 1023.12 1064.88 1169.28 1231.92 1273.68
A Uniform Incentive HR 0.68 0.70 0.73 0.77 0.84 0.88 0.91
BW 54.40 56.00 58.40 61.60 67.20 70.40 72.80
MO 118.32 121.80 127.02 133.98 146.16 153.12 158.34
YR 1419.84 1461.60 1524.24 1607.76 1753.92 1837.44 1900.08
PO-I Regular Pay HR 28.16 29.29 30.44 32.15 33.91 35.80 37.80
1 BW 2252.80 2343.20 2435.20 2572.00 2712.80 2864.00 3024.00
MO 4899.84 5096.46 5296.56 5594.10 5900.34 6229.20 6577.20
YR  58798.08 61157.52 63558.72 67129.20 70804.08 74750.40 78926.40
1 POST Intermediate HR 0.28 0.29 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38
BW 22.40 23.20 24.00 25.60 27.20 28.80 30.40
MO 48.72 50.46 52.20 55.68. 59.16 62.64 66.12
YR 584.64 605.52 626.40 668.16 709.92 751.68 793.44
1 POST Advanced HR 0.56 0.59 0.61 0.64 0.68 0.72 0.76
BW 44.80 47.20 48.80 51.20 54.40 57.60 60.80
MO 97.44 102.66 106.14 111.36 118.32 125.28 132.24
YR 1169.28 1231.92 1273.68 1336.32 1419.84 1503.36 1586.88
1 Uniform Incentive HR 0.84 0.88 0.91 0.96 1.02 1.07 1.13
BW 67.20 70.40 72.80 76.80 81.60 85.60 90.40
MO 146.16 153.12 158.34 167.04 177.48 186.18 196.62
YR 1753.92 1837.44 1900.08 2004.48 2129.76 2234.16 2359.44

 

- 119 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX C-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-II Regular Pay HR 30.44 32.15 33.91 35.80 37.80 39.90
2 BW 2435.20 2572.00 2712.80 2864.00 3024.00 3192.00
MO 5296.56 5594.10 5900.34 6229.20 6577.20 6942.60
YR 63558.72 67129.20 70804.08 74750.40 78926.40 83311.20
2 POST Intermediate HR 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40
BW 24.00 25.60 27.20 28.80 30.40 32.00
MO 52.20 55.68 59.16 62.64 66.12 69.60
YR 626.40 668.16 709.92 751.68 793.44 835.20
2 POST Advanced HR 0.61 0.64 0.68 0.72 0.76 0.80
BW 48.80 51.20 54.40 57.60 60.80 64.00
MO 106.14 111.36 118.32 125.28 132.24 139.20
YR 1273.68 1336.32 1419.84 1503.36 1586.88 1670.40
2 Uniform Incentive HR 0.91 0.96 1.02 1.07 1.13 1.20
BW 72.80 76.80 81.60 85.60 90.40 96.00
MO 158.34 167.04 177.48 186.18 196.62 208.80
YR 1900.08 2004.48 2129.76 2234.16 2359.44 2505.60
PO-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 32.15 33.91 35.80 37.80 39.90 42.19
3 BW 2572.00 2712.80 2864.00 3024.00 3192.00 3375.20
MO 5594.10 5900.34 6229.20 6577.20 6942.60 7341.06
YR 67129.20 70804.08 74750.40 78926.40 83311.20 88092.72
3 POST Intermediate HR 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42
BW 25.60 27.20 28.80 30.40 32.00 33.60
MO 55.68 59.16 62.64 66.12 69.60 73.08
YR 668.16 709.92 751.68 793.44 835.20 876.96
3 POST Advanced HR 0.64 0.68 0.72 0.76 0.80 0.84
BW 51.20 54.40 57.60 60.80 64.00 67.20
MO 111.36 118.32 125.28 132.24 139.20 146.16
YR 1336.32 1419.84 1503.36 1586.88 1670.40 1753.92
3 Uniform Incentive HR 0.96 1.02 1.07 1.13 1.20 1.27
BW 76.80 81.60 85.60 90.40 96.00 101.60
MO 167.04 177.48 186.18 196.62 208.80 220.98
YR 2004.48 2129.76 2234.16 2359.44 2505.60. 2651.76

 

- 120 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX C-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO Ill
4 Regular Pay HR 37.80 39.90 42.19 44.50
BW 3024.00 3192.00 3375.20 3560.00
MO 6577.20 6942.60 7341.06 7743.00
YR 78926.40 83311.20 88092.72 92916.00
4 POST Intermediate HR 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.45
BW 30.40 32.00 33.60 36.00
MO 66.12 69.60 73.08 78.30
YR 793.44 835.20 876.96 939.60
4 POST Advanced HR 0.76 0.80 0.84 0.89
BW 60.80 64.00 67.20 71.20
MO 132.24 139.20 146.16 154.86
YR 1586.88 1670.40 1753.92 1858.32
4 Uniform Incentive HR 1.13 1.20 1.27 1.34
BW 90.40 96.00 101.60 107.20
MO 196.62 208.80 220.98 233.16
YR 2359.44 2505.60 2651.76 2797.92
DET-I Regular Pay HR 39.90 42.19 44.50 46.97
5 BW 3192.00 3375.20 3560.00 3757.60
MO 6942.60 7341.06 7743.00 8172.78
YR 83311.20 88092.72 92916.00 98073.36
5 POST Intermediate HR 0.40 0.42 0.45 0.47
BW 32.00 33.60 36.00 37.60
MO 69.60 73.08 78.30 81.78
YR 835.20 876.96 939.60 981.36
5 POST Advanced HR 0.80 0.84 0.89 0.94
BW 64.00 67.20 71.20 75.20
MO 139.20 146.16 154.86 163.56
YR 1670.40 1753.92 1858.32 1962.72
5 Uniform Incentive HR 1.20 1.27 1.34 1.41
BW 96.00 101.60 107.20 112.80
MO 208.80 220.98 233.16 245.34
YR 2505.60 2651.76 2797.92 2944.08
5 Detective Incentive HR 0.40 0.42 0.45 0.47
BW 32.00 33.60 36.00 37.60
MO 69.60 73.08 78.30 81.78
YR 835.20 876.96 939.60 981.36

 

-121-
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX C-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-Il_ Regular Pay HR 44.50 46.97 49.60
SGT-I BW 3560.00 3757.60 3968.00
6 MO 7743.00 8172.78 8630.40
YR 92916.00 98073.36 103564.80
6 POST Intermediate HR 0.45, 0.47 0.50
BW 36.00 37.60 40.00
MO 78.30 81.78 87.00
YR 939.60 981.36 1044.00
6 POST Advanced HR 0.89 0.94 0.99
BW 71.20 75.20 79.20
MO 154.86 163.56 172.26
YR 1858.32 1962.72 2067.12
6 Uniform Incentive HR 1.34 1.41 1.49
BW 107.20 112.80 119.20
MO 233.16 245.34 259.26
YR 2797.92 2944.08 3111.12
6 Detective Incentive HR 0.45 0.47 0.50
BW 36.00 37.60 40.00
MO 78.30 81.78 87.00
YR 939.60 981.36 1044.00
SGT-Il_ Regular Pay HR 46.97 49.60 52.37
7 BW 3757.60 3968.00 4189.60
MO 8172.78 8630.40 9112.38
YR 98073.36 103564.80 109348.56
7 POST Intermediate HR 0.47 0.50 0.52
BW 37.60 40.00 41.60
MO 81.78 87.00 90.48
YR 981.36 1044.00 1085.76
7 POST Advanced HR 0.94 0.99 1.05
BW 75.20 79.20 84.00
MO 163.56 172.26 182.70
YR 1962.72 2067.12 2192.40
7 Uniform Incentive HR 1.41 1.49 1.57
BW 112.80 119.20 125.60
MO 245.34 259.26 273.18
YR 2944.08 3111.12 3278.16

- 122 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX C-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

 

 

1 2 3 5 6 7
DET-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 49.60 52.37 55.28
8 BW 3968.00 4189.60 4422.40
MO 8630.40 9112.38 9618.72
YR 103564.80 109348.56 115424.64
8 POST Intermediate HR 0.50 0.52 0.55
BW 40.00 41.60 44.00
MO 87.00 90.48 95.70
YR 1044.00 1085.76 1148.40
8 POST Advanced HR 0.99 1.05 1.11
BW 79.20 84.00 88.80
MO 172.26 182.70 193.14
YR 2067.12 2192.40 2317.68
8 Uniform Incentive HR 1.49 1.57 1.66
BW 119.20 125.60 132.80
MO 259.26 273.18 288.84
YR 3111.12 3278.16 3466.08
8 Detective Incentive HR 0.50 0.52 0.55
BW 40.00 41.60 44.00
MO 87.00 90.48 95.70
YR 1044.00 1085.76 1148.40
LT-I Regular Pay HR 52.37 55.28 58.35
9 BW 4189.60 4422.40 4668.00
MO 9112.38 9618.72 10152.90
YR 109348.56 115424.64 121834.80
9 POST Intermediate HR 0.52 0.55 0.58
BW 41.60 44.00 46.40
MO 90.48 95.70 100.92
YR 1085.76 1148.40 1211.04
9 POST Advanced HR 1.05 1.11 1.17
BW 84.00 88.80 93.60
MO 182.70 193.14 203.58
YR 2192.40 2317.68 2442.96
9 Uniform Incentive HR 1.57 1.66 1.75
BW 125.60 132.80 140.00
MO 273.18 288.84 304.50
YR 3278.16 3466.08 3654.00

- 123 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX C-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

 

2 5 6 7
LT-II Regular Pay HR 55.28 58.35 61.59
10 BW 4422.40 4668.00 4927.20
MO 9618.72 10152.90 10716.66
YR 115424.64 121834.80 128599.92
10 POST Intermediate HR 0.55 0.58 0.62
BW 44.00 46.40 49.60
MO 95.70 100.92 107.88
YR 1148.40 1211.04 1294.56
10 POST Advanced HR 1.11 1.17 1.23
BW 88.80 93.60 98.40
MO 193.14 203.58 214.02
YR 2317.68 2442.96 2568.24
10 Uniform Incentive HR 1.66 1.75 1.85
BW 132.80 140.00 148.00
MO 288.84 304.50 321.90
YR 3466.08 3654.00 3862.80
LT
11 Regular Pay HR 58.35 61.59 64.98
BW 4668.00 4927.20 5198.40
MO 10152.90 10716.66 11306.52
YR 121834.80 128599.92 135678.24
11 POST Intermediate HR 0.58 0.62 0.65
BW 46.40 49.60 52.00
MO 100.92 107.88 113.10
YR 1211.04 1294.56 1357.20
11 POST Advanced HR 1.17 1.23 1.30
BW 93.60 98.40 104.00
MO 203.58 214.02 226.20
YR 2442.96 2568.24 2714.40
11 Uniform Incentive HR 1.75 1.85 1.95
BW 140.00 148.00 156.00
MO 304.50 321.90 339.30
YR 3654.00 3862.80 4071.60

-124-
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX C-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2012

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

2 5 6 7

LT

12 Regular Pay HR 61.59 64.98 68.61
BW 4927.20 5198.40 5488.80
MO 10716.66 11306.52 11938.14
YR 128599.92 135678.24 143257.68

12 POST Intermediate HR 0.62 0.65 0.69
BW 49.60 52.00 55.20
MO 107.88 113.10 120.06
YR 1294.56 1357.20 1440.72

12 POST Advanced HR 1.23 1.30 1.37
BW 98.40 104.00 109.60
MO 214.02 226.20 238.38
YR 2568.24 2714.40 2860.56

12 Uniform Incentive HR 1.85 1.95 2.06
BW 148.00 156.00 164.80
MO 321.90 339.30 358.44
YR 3862.80 4071.60 4301.28

 

- 125 -
POLICE OFFICERS UNIT
APPENDIX D-1
OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

Code Class and Pay Grade Schedule
2214-1 Police Officer | A-1
2217 Police Specialist * A-2
2214-2 Police Officer II A-2
2214-3 Police Officer II! 3
2223-1 Police Detective | 5
2223-2 Police Detective I! 6
2223-3 Police Detective III 8
2227-1 Police Sergeant | 6
2227-2 Police Sergeant II 7
2232-1 Police Lieutenant | 9
2232-2 Police Lieutenant II 10

Biweekly/Monthly Longevity Compensation for Police Officers:

Years of Service Completed Biweekly Monthly
10 years and less than 15 years $89.60 $194.88
15 years and less than 20 years $179.20 $389.76
20 years of service and over $268.80 $584.64

Salary Tables:
Appendix D-2 Regular Pay
Appendix D-3 Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives

* Police Specialist (Schedule A-2) The regular pay for this class is a salary range from PO-I to the top
step of PO-Il and is dependent upon the member's education and experience. Individuals in this
class may receive any POST bonus and/or Uniform Field Officers Incentive if so qualified.

- 126 -
CLASS
SCHEDULE

PO-&ll

A

PO-|

PO-II

PO-III

DET-I

DET-II

SGT-I

SGT-II

DET-III

LT-

LT-II

10

11

12

HR
BW
MO
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

22.98
1838.40
3998.52

47982.24

28.72
2297.60
4997.28

59967.36

REGULAR PAY

4

26.22
2097.60
4562.28

54747.36

32.79
2623.20
5705.46

68465.52

34.59
2767.20
6018.66

72223.92

36.52
2921.60
6354.48

APPENDIX D-2
OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013
2 3
23.91 24.84
1912.80 1987.20
4160.34 4322.16
49924.08 51865.92
29.88 31.05
2390.40 2484.00
5199.12 5402.70
62389.44 64832.40
31.05 32.79
2484.00 2623.20
5402.70 5705.46
64832.40 68465.52
32.79 34.59
2623.20 2767.20
5705.46 6018.66
68465.52 72223.92

76253.76

38.56
3084.80
6709.44

80513.28

40.70
3256.00
7081.80

84981.60

28.72
2297.60
4997.28

59967.36

34.59
2767.20
6018.66

72223.92

36.52
2921.60
6354.48

76253.76

38.56
3084.80
6709.44

80513.28

40.70
3256.00
7081.80

84981.60

43.03
3442.40
7487.22

89846.64

45.39
3631.20
7897.86

94774.32

47.91
3832.80
8336.34

100036.08

50.59
4047.20
8802.66

105631.92

53.42
4273.60
9295.08

111540.96

56.39
4511.20
9811.86

117742.32

59.52
4761.60
10356.48
124277.76

62.82
5025.60
10930.68
131168.16

29.88
2390.40
5199.12

62389.44

36.52
2921.60
6354.48

76253.76

38.56
3084.80
6709.44

80513.28

40.70
3256.00
7081.80

84981.60

43.03
3442.40
7487.22

89846.64

45.39
3631.20
7897.86

94774.32

47.91
3832.80
8336.34

100036.08

50.59
4047.20
8802.66

105631.92

53.42
4273.60
9295.08

111540.96

56.39
4511.20
9811.86

117742.32

59.52
4761.60
10356.48
124277.76

62.82
5025.60
10930.68
131168.16

66.28
5302.40
11532.72
138392.64

31.05
2484.00
5402.70

64832.40

38.56
3084.80
6709.44

80513.28

40.70
3256.00
7081.80

84981.60

43.03
3442.40
7487.22

89846.64

45.39
3631.20
7897.86

94774.32

47.91
3832.80
8336.34

100036.08

50.59
4047.20
8802.66

105631.92

53.42
4273.60
9295.08

111540.96

56.39
4511.20
9811.86

117742.32

59.52
4761.60
10356.48
124277.76

62.82
5025.60
10930.68
131168.16

66.28
5302.40
11532.72
138392.64

69.98
5598.40
12176.52
146118.24

 

- 127 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX D-3 OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-I&ll_ Regular Pay HR 22.98 23.91 24.84 26.22 28.72 29.88 31.05
A BW 1838.40 1912.80 1987.20 2097.60 2297.60 2390.40 2484.00
MO 3998.52 4160.34 4322.16 4562.28 4997.28 5199.12 5402.70
YR  47982.24 49924.08 51865.92 54747.36 59967.36 62389.44 64832.40
A POST Intermediate HR 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.29 0.30 0.31
BW 18.40 19.20 20.00 20.80 23.20 24.00 24.80
MO 40.02 41.76 43.50 45.24 50.46 52.20 53.94
YR 480.24 501.12 522.00 542.88 605.52 626.40 647.28
A POST Advanced HR 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.52 0.57 0.60 0.62
BW 36.80 38.40 40.00 41.60 45.60 48.00 49.60
MO 80.04 83.52 87.00 90.48. 99.18 104.40 107.88
YR 960.48 1002.24 1044.00 1085.76 1190.16 1252.80 1294.56
A Uniform Incentive HR 0.69 0.72 0.75 0.79 0.86 0.90 0.93
BW 55.20 57.60 60.00 63.20 68.80 72.00 74.40
MO 120.06 125.28 130.50 137.46 149.64 156.60 161.82
YR 1440.72 1503.36 1566.00 1649.52 1795.68 1879.20 1941.84
PO-I Regular Pay HR 28.72 29.88 31.05 32.79 34.59 36.52 38.56
1 BW 2297.60 2390.40 2484.00 2623.20 2767.20 2921.60 3084.80
MO 4997.28 5199.12 5402.70 5705.46 6018.66 6354.48 6709.44
YR  59967.36 62389.44 64832.40 68465.52 72223.92 76253.76 80513.28
1 POST Intermediate HR 0.29 0.30 0.31 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39
BW 23.20 24.00 24.80 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20
MO 50.46 52.20 53.94 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86
YR 605.52 626.40 647.28 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32
1 POST Advanced HR 0.57 0.60 0.62 0.66 0.69 0.73 0.77
BW 45.60 48.00 49.60 52.80 55.20 58.40 61.60
MO 99.18 104.40 107.88 114.84 120.06 127.02 133.98
YR 1190.16 1252.80 1294.56 1378.08 1440.72 1524.24 1607.76
1 Uniform Incentive HR 0.86 0.90 0.93 0.98 1.04 1.10 1.16
BW 68.80 72.00 74.40 78.40 83.20 88.00 92.80
MO 149.64 156.60 161.82 170.52 180.96 191.40 201.84
YR 1795.68 1879.20 1941.84 2046.24 2171.52 2296.80 2422.08

 

- 128 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX D-3 OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-II Regular Pay HR 31.05 32.79 34.59 36.52 38.56 40.70
2 BW 2484.00 2623.20 2767.20 2921.60 3084.80 3256.00
MO 5402.70 5705.46 6018.66 6354.48 6709.44 7081.80
YR 64832.40 68465.52 72223.92 76253.76 80513.28 84981.60
2 POST Intermediate HR 0.31 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39 0.41
BW 24.80 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20 32.80
MO 53.94 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86 71.34
YR 647.28 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32 856.08
2 POST Advanced HR 0.62 0.66 0.69 0.73 0.77 0.81
BW 49.60 52.80 55.20 58.40 61.60 64.80
MO 107.88 114.84 120.06 127.02 133.98 140.94
YR 1294.56 1378.08 1440.72 1524.24 1607.76 1691.28
2 Uniform Incentive HR 0.93 0.98 1.04 1.10 1.16 1.22
BW 74.40 78.40 83.20 88.00 92.80 97.60
MO 161.82 170.52 180.96 191.40 201.84 212.28
YR 1941.84 2046.24 2171.52 2296.80 2422.08 2547.36
PO-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 32.79 34.59 36.52 38.56 40.70 43.03
3 BW 2623.20 2767.20 2921.60 3084.80 3256.00 3442.40
MO 5705.46 6018.66 6354.48 6709.44 7081.80 7487.22
YR 68465.52 72223.92 76253.76 80513.28 84981.60 89846.64
3 POST Intermediate HR 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39 0.41 0.43
BW 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20 32.80 34.40
MO 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86 71.34 74.82
YR 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32 856.08 897.84
3 POST Advanced HR 0.66 0.69 0.73 0.77 0.81 0.86
BW 52.80 55.20 58.40 61.60 64.80 68.80
MO 114.84 120.06 127.02 133.98 140.94 149.64
YR 1378.08 1440.72 1524.24 1607.76 1691.28 1795.68
3 Uniform Incentive HR 0.98 1.04 1.10 1.16 1.22 1.29
BW 78.40 83.20 88.00 92.80 97.60 103.20
MO 170.52 180.96 191.40 201.84 212.28 224.46
YR 2046.24 2171.52 2296.80 2422.08 2547.36 2693.52

 

- 129 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX D-3 OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO Ill
4 Regular Pay HR 38.56 40.70 43.03 45.39
BW 3084.80 3256.00 3442.40 3631.20
MO 6709.44 7081.80 7487.22 7897.86
YR 80513.28 84981.60 89846.64 94774.32
4 POST Intermediate HR 0.39 0.41 0.43 0.45
BW 31.20 32.80 34.40 36.00
MO 67.86 71.34 74.82 78.30
YR 814.32 856.08 897.84 939.60
4 POST Advanced HR 0.77 0.81 0.86 0.91
BW 61.60 64.80 68.80 72.80
MO 133.98 140.94 149.64 158.34
YR 1607.76 1691.28 1795.68 1900.08
4 Uniform Incentive HR 1.16 1.22 1.29 1.36
BW 92.80 97.60 103.20 108.80
MO 201.84 212.28 224.46 236.64
YR 2422.08 2547.36 2693.52 2839.68
DET-I Regular Pay HR 40.70 43.03 45.39 47.91
5 BW 3256.00 3442.40 3631.20 3832.80
MO 7081.80 7487.22 7897.86 8336.34
YR 84981.60 89846.64 94774.32 100036.08
5 POST Intermediate HR 0.41 0.43 0.45 0.48
BW 32.80 34.40 36.00 38.40
MO 71.34 74.82 78.30 83.52
YR 856.08 897.84 939.60 1002.24
5 POST Advanced HR 0.81 0.86 0.91 0.96
BW 64.80 68.80 72.80 76.80
MO 140.94 149.64 158.34 167.04
YR 1691.28 1795.68 1900.08 2004.48
5 Uniform Incentive HR 1.22 1.29 1.36 1.44
BW 97.60 103.20 108.80 115.20
MO 212.28 224.46 236.64 250.56
YR 2547.36 2693.52 2839.68 3006.72
5 Detective Incentive HR 0.41 0.43 0.45 0.48
BW 32.80 34.40 36.00 38.40
MO 71.34 74.82 78.30 83.52
YR 856.08 897.84 939.60 1002.24

 

- 130 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX D-3 OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-Il_ Regular Pay HR 45.39 47.91 50.59
SGT-I BW 3631.20 3832.80 4047.20
6 MO 7897.86 8336.34 8802.66
YR 94774.32 100036.08 105631.92
6 POST Intermediate HR 0.45, 0.48 0.51
BW 36.00 38.40 40.80
MO 78.30 83.52 88.74
YR 939.60 1002.24 1064.88
6 POST Advanced HR 0.91 0.96 1.01
BW 72.80 76.80 80.80
MO 158.34 167.04 175.74
YR 1900.08 2004.48 2108.88
6 Uniform Incentive HR 1.36 1.44 1.52
BW 108.80 115.20 121.60
MO 236.64 250.56 264.48
YR 2839.68 3006.72 3173.76
6 Detective Incentive HR 0.45 0.48 0.51
BW 36.00 38.40 40.80
MO 78.30 83.52 88.74
YR 939.60 1002.24 1064.88
SGT-Il_ Regular Pay HR 47.91 50.59 53.42
7 BW 3832.80 4047.20 4273.60
MO 8336.34 8802.66 9295.08
YR 100036.08 105631.92 111540.96
7 POST Intermediate HR 0.48 0.51 0.53
BW 38.40 40.80 42.40
MO 83.52 88.74 92.22
YR 1002.24 1064.88 1106.64
7 POST Advanced HR 0.96 1.01 1.07
BW 76.80 80.80 85.60
MO 167.04 175.74 186.18
YR 2004.48 2108.88 2234.16
7 Uniform Incentive HR 1.44 1.52 1.60
BW 115.20 121.60 128.00
MO 250.56 264.48 278.40
YR 3006.72 3173.76 3340.80

-131-
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX D-3 OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 50.59 53.42 56.39
8 BW 4047.20 4273.60 4511.20
MO 8802.66 9295.08 9811.86
YR 105631.92 111540.96 117742.32
8 POST Intermediate HR 0.51 0.53 0.56
BW 40.80 42.40 44.80
MO 88.74 92.22 97.44
YR 1064.88 1106.64 1169.28
8 POST Advanced HR 1.01 1.07 1.13
BW 80.80 85.60 90.40
MO 175.74 186.18 196.62
YR 2108.88 2234.16 2359.44
8 Uniform Incentive HR 1.52 1.60 1.69
BW 121.60 128.00 135.20
MO 264.48 278.40 294.06
YR 3173.76 3340.80 3528.72
8 Detective Incentive HR 0.51 0.53 0.56
BW 40.80 42.40 44.80
MO 88.74 92.22 97.44
YR 1064.88 1106.64 1169.28
LT-I Regular Pay HR 53.42 56.39 59.52
9 BW 4273.60 4511.20 4761.60
MO 9295.08 9811.86 10356.48
YR 111540.96 117742.32 124277.76
9 POST Intermediate HR 0.53 0.56 0.60
BW 42.40 44.80 48.00
MO 92.22 97.44 104.40
YR 1106.64 1169.28 1252.80
9 POST Advanced HR 1.07 1.13 1.19
BW 85.60 90.40 95.20
MO 186.18 196.62 207.06
YR 2234.16 2359.44 2484.72
9 Uniform Incentive HR 1.60 1.69 1.79
BW 128.00 135.20 143.20
MO 278.40 294.06 311.46
YR 3340.80 3528.72 3737.52

- 132 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX D-3 OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

 

2 5 6 7
LT-II Regular Pay HR 56.39 59.52 62.82
10 BW 4511.20 4761.60 5025.60
MO 9811.86 10356.48 10930.68
YR 117742.32 124277.76 131168.16
10 POST Intermediate HR 0.56 0.60 0.63
BW 44.80 48.00 50.40
MO 97.44 104.40 109.62
YR 1169.28 1252.80 1315.44
10 POST Advanced HR 1.13 1.19 1.26
BW 90.40 95.20 100.80
MO 196.62 207.06 219.24
YR 2359.44 2484.72 2630.88
10 Uniform Incentive HR 1.69 1.79 1.88
BW 135.20 143.20 150.40
MO 294.06 311.46 327.12
YR 3528.72 3737.52 3925.44
LT
11 Regular Pay HR 59.52 62.82 66.28
BW 4761.60 5025.60 5302.40
MO 10356.48 10930.68 11532.72
YR 124277.76 131168.16 138392.64
11 POST Intermediate HR 0.60 0.63 0.66
BW 48.00 50.40 52.80
MO 104.40 109.62 114.84
YR 1252.80 1315.44 1378.08
11 POST Advanced HR 1.19 1.26 1.33
BW 95.20 100.80 106.40
MO 207.06 219.24 231.42
YR 2484.72 2630.88 2777.04
11 Uniform Incentive HR 1.79 1.88 1.99
BW 143.20 150.40 159.20
MO 311.46 327.12 346.26
YR 3737.52 3925.44 4155.12

- 133 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX D-3 OPERATIVE JANUARY 1, 2013

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

2 5 6 7

LT

12 Regular Pay HR 62.82 66.28 69.98
BW 5025.60 5302.40 5598.40
MO 10930.68 11532.72 12176.52
YR 131168.16 138392.64 146118.24

12 POST Intermediate HR 0.63 0.66 0.70
BW 50.40 52.80 56.00
MO 109.62 114.84 121.80
YR 1315.44 1378.08 1461.60

12 POST Advanced HR 1.26 1.33 1.40
BW 100.80 106.40 112.00
MO 219.24 231.42 243.60
YR 2630.88 2777.04 2923.20

12 Uniform Incentive HR 1.88 1.99 2.10
BW 150.40 159.20 168.00
MO 327.12 346.26 365.40
YR 3925.44 4155.12 4384.80

 

- 134 -
POLICE OFFICERS UNIT
APPENDIX E-1
OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

Code Class and Pay Grade Schedule
2214-1 Police Officer | A-1
2217 Police Specialist * A-2
2214-2 Police Officer II A-2
2214-3 Police Officer II! 3
2223-1 Police Detective | 5
2223-2 Police Detective I! 6
2223-3 Police Detective III 8
2227-1 Police Sergeant | 6
2227-2 Police Sergeant II 7
2232-1 Police Lieutenant | 9
2232-2 Police Lieutenant II 10

Biweekly/Monthly Longevity Compensation for Police Officers:

Years of Service Completed Biweekly Monthly
10 years and less than 15 years $90.40 $196.62
15 years and less than 20 years $180.80 $393.24
20 years of service and over $271.20 $589.86

Salary Tables:
Appendix E-2 Regular Pay
Appendix E-3 Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives

* Police Specialist (Schedule A-2) The regular pay for this class is a salary range from PO-I to the top
step of PO-Il and is dependent upon the member's education and experience. Individuals in this
class may receive any POST bonus and/or Uniform Field Officers Incentive if so qualified.

- 135 -
CLASS
SCHEDULE

PO-&ll

A

PO-|

PO-II

PO-III

DET-I

DET-II

SGT-I

SGT-II

DET-III

LT-

LT-II

10

11

12

HR
BW
MO
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

23.21
1856.80
4038.54

48462.48

29.01
2320.80
5047.74

60572.88

REGULAR PAY

4

26.48
2118.40
4607.52

55290.24

33.12
2649.60
5762.88

69154.56

34.94
2795.20
6079.56

72954.72

36.89
2951.20
6418.86

APPENDIX E-2
OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013
2 3
24.15 25.09
1932.00 2007.20
4202.10 4365.66
$0425.20 52387.92
30.18 31.36
2414.40 2508.80
$251.32 5456.64
63015.84 65479.68
31.36 33.12
2508.80 2649.60
5456.64 5762.88
65479.68 69154.56
33.12 34.94
2649.60 2795.20
5762.88 6079.56
69154.56 72954.72

77026.32

38.95
3116.00
6777.30

81327.60

41.11
3288.80
7153.14

85837.68

29.01
2320.80
5047.74

60572.88

34.94
2795.20
6079.56

72954.72

36.89
2951.20
6418.86

77026.32

38.95,
3116.00
6777.30

81327.60

41.11
3288.80
7153.14

85837.68

43.46
3476.80
7562.04

90744.48

45.84
3667.20
7976.16

95713.92

48.39
3871.20
8419.86

101038.32

51.10
4088.00
8891.40

106696.80

53.95,
4316.00
9387.30

112647.60

56.95,
4556.00
9909.30

118911.60

60.12
4809.60
10460.88
125530.56

63.45,
5076.00
11040.30
132483.60

30.18
2414.40
5251.32

63015.84

36.89
2951.20
6418.86

77026.32

38.95,
3116.00
6777.30

81327.60

41.11
3288.80
7153.14

85837.68

43.46
3476.80
7562.04

90744.48

45.84
3667.20
7976.16

95713.92

48.39
3871.20
8419.86

101038.32

51.10
4088.00
8891.40

106696.80

53.95,
4316.00
9387.30

112647.60

56.95,
4556.00
9909.30

118911.60

60.12
4809.60
10460.88
125530.56

63.45,
5076.00
11040.30
132483.60

66.94
5355.20
11647.56
139770.72

31.36
2508.80
5456.64

65479.68

38.95,
3116.00
6777.30

81327.60

41.11
3288.80
7153.14

85837.68

43.46
3476.80
7562.04

90744.48

45.84
3667.20
7976.16

95713.92

48.39
3871.20
8419.86

101038.32

51.10
4088.00
8891.40

106696.80

53.95,
4316.00
9387.30

112647.60

56.95
4556.00
9909.30

118911.60

60.12
4809.60
10460.88
125530.56

63.45
5076.00
11040.30
132483.60

66.94
5355.20
11647.56
139770.72

70.68
5654.40
12298.32
147579.84

 

- 136 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX E-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-l&ll Regular Pay HR 23.21 24.15 25.09 26.48 29.01 30.18 31.36
A BW 1856.80 1932.00 2007.20 2118.40 2320.80 2414.40 2508.80
MO 4038.54 4202.10 4365.66 4607.52 5047.74 5251.32 5456.64
YR 48462.48 50425.20 52387.92 55290.24 60572.88 63015.84 65479.68
A POST Intermediate HR 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.29 0.30 0.31
BW 18.40 19.20 20.00 20.80 23.20 24.00 24.80
MO 40.02 41.76 43.50 45.24 50.46 52.20 53.94
YR 480.24 501.12 522.00 542.88 605.52 626.40 647.28
A POST Advanced HR 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.53 0.58 0.60 0.63
BW 36.80 38.40 40.00 42.40 46.40 48.00 50.40
MO 80.04 83.52 87.00 92.22 100.92 104.40 109.62
YR 960.48 1002.24 1044.00 1106.64 1211.04 1252.80 1315.44
A Uniform Incentive HR 0.70 0.72 0.75 0.79 0.87 0.91 0.94
BW 56.00 57.60 60.00 63.20 69.60 72.80 75.20
MO 121.80 125.28 130.50 137.46 151.38 158.34 163.56
YR 1461.60 1503.36 1566.00 1649.52 1816.56 1900.08 1962.72
PO-I Regular Pay HR 29.01 30.18 31.36 33.12 34.94 36.89 38.95
1 BW 2320.80 2414.40 2508.80 2649.60 2795.20 2951.20 3116.00
MO 5047.74 5251.32 5456.64 5762.88 6079.56 6418.86 6777.30
YR  60572.88 63015.84 65479.68 69154.56 72954.72 77026.32 81327.60
1 POST Intermediate HR 0.29 0.30 0.31 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39
BW 23.20 24.00 24.80 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20
MO 50.46 52.20 53.94 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86
YR 605.52 626.40 647.28 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32
1 POST Advanced HR 0.58 0.60 0.63 0.66 0.70 0.74 0.78
BW 46.40 48.00 50.40 52.80 56.00 59.20 62.40
MO 100.92 104.40 109.62 114.84 121.80 128.76 135.72
YR 1211.04 1252.80 1315.44 1378.08 1461.60 1545.12 1628.64
1 Uniform Incentive HR 0.87 0.91 0.94 0.99 1.05 1.11 1.17
BW 69.60 72.80 75.20 79.20 84.00 88.80 93.60
MO 151.38 158.34 163.56 172.26 182.70 193.14 203.58
YR 1816.56 1900.08 1962.72 2067.12 2192.40 2317.68 2442.96

 

- 137 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX E-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-II — Regular Pay HR 31.36 33.12 34.94 36.89 38.95, 41.11
2 BW 2508.80 2649.60 2795.20 2951.20 3116.00 3288.80
MO 5456.64 5762.88 6079.56 6418.86 6777.30 7153.14
YR 65479.68 69154.56 72954.72 77026.32 81327.60 85837.68
2 POST Intermediate HR 0.31 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39 0.41
BW 24.80 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20 32.80
MO 53.94 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86 71.34
YR 647.28 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32 856.08
2 POST Advanced HR 0.63 0.66 0.70 0.74 0.78 0.82
BW 50.40 52.80 56.00 59.20 62.40 65.60
MO 109.62 114.84 121.80 128.76 135.72 142.68
YR 1315.44 1378.08 1461.60 1545.12 1628.64 1712.16
2 Uniform Incentive HR 0.94 0.99 1.05 1.11 1.17 1.23
BW 75.20 79.20 84.00 88.80 93.60 98.40
MO 163.56 172.26 182.70 193.14 203.58 214.02
YR 1962.72 2067.12 2192.40 2317.68 2442.96 2568.24
PO-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 33.12 34.94 36.89 38.95 41.11 43.46
3 BW 2649.60 2795.20 2951.20 3116.00 3288.80 3476.80
MO 5762.88 6079.56 6418.86 6777.30 7153.14 7562.04
YR 69154.56 72954.72 77026.32 81327.60 85837.68 90744.48
3 POST Intermediate HR 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39 0.41 0.43
BW 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20 32.80 34.40
MO 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86 71.34 74.82
YR 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32 856.08 897.84
3 POST Advanced HR 0.66 0.70 0.74 0.78 0.82 0.87
BW 52.80 56.00 59.20 62.40 65.60 69.60
MO 114.84 121.80 128.76 135.72 142.68 151.38
YR 1378.08 1461.60 1545.12 1628.64 1712.16 1816.56
3 Uniform Incentive HR 0.99 1.05 1.11 1.17 1.23 1.30
BW 79.20 84.00 88.80 93.60 98.40 104.00
MO 172.26 182.70 193.14 203.58 214.02 226.20
YR 2067.12 2192.40 2317.68 2442.96 2568.24 2714.40

 

- 138 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX E-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO III
4 Regular Pay HR 38.95 41.11 43.46 45.84
BW 3116.00 3288.80 3476.80 3667.20
MO 6777.30 7153.14 7562.04 7976.16
YR 81327.60 85837.68 90744.48 95713.92
4 POST Intermediate HR 0.39 0.41 0.43 0.46
BW 31.20 32.80 34.40 36.80
MO 67.86 71.34 74.82 80.04
YR 814.32 856.08 897.84 960.48
4 POST Advanced HR 0.78 0.82 0.87 0.92
BW 62.40 65.60 69.60 73.60
MO 135.72 142.68 151.38 160.08
YR 1628.64 1712.16 1816.56 1920.96
4 Uniform Incentive HR 1.17 1.23 1.30 1.38
BW 93.60 98.40 104.00 110.40
MO 203.58 214.02 226.20 240.12
YR 2442.96 2568.24 2714.40 2881.44
DET-| Regular Pay HR 41.11 43.46 45.84 48.39
5 BW 3288.80 3476.80 3667.20 3871.20
MO 7153.14 7562.04 7976.16 8419.86
YR 85837.68 90744.48 95713.92 101038.32
5 POST Intermediate HR 0.41 0.43 0.46 0.48
BW 32.80 34.40 36.80 38.40
MO 71.34 74.82 80.04 83.52
YR 856.08 897.84 960.48 1002.24
5 POST Advanced HR 0.82 0.87 0.92 0.97
BW 65.60 69.60 73.60 77.60
MO 142.68 151.38 160.08 168.78
YR 1712.16 1816.56 1920.96 2025.36
5 Uniform Incentive HR 1.23 1.30 1.38 1.45
BW 98.40 104.00 110.40 116.00
MO 214.02 226.20 240.12 252.30
YR 2568.24 2714.40 2881.44 3027.60
5 Detective Incentive HR 0.41 0.43 0.46 0.48
BW 32.80 34.40 36.80 38.40
MO 71.34 74.82 80.04 83.52
YR 856.08 897.84 960.48 1002.24

 

- 139 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX E-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-Il Regular Pay HR 45.84 48.39 51.10
SGT-I BW 3667.20 3871.20 4088.00
6 MO 7976.16 8419.86 8891.40
YR 95713.92 101038.32 106696.80
6 POST Intermediate HR 0.46 0.48 0.51
BW 36.80 38.40 40.80
MO 80.04 83.52 88.74
YR 960.48 1002.24 1064.88
6 POST Advanced HR 0.92 0.97 1.02
BW 73.60 77.60 81.60
MO 160.08 168.78 177.48
YR 1920.96 2025.36 2129.76
6 Uniform Incentive HR 1.38 1.45 1.53
BW 110.40 116.00 122.40
MO 240.12 252.30 266.22
YR 2881.44 3027.60 3194.64
6 Detective Incentive HR 0.46 0.48 0.51
BW 36.80 38.40 40.80
MO 80.04 83.52 88.74
YR 960.48 1002.24 1064.88
SGT-Il_ Regular Pay HR 48.39 51.10 53.95
7 BW 3871.20 4088.00 4316.00
MO 8419.86 8891.40 9387.30
YR 101038.32 106696.80 112647.60
7 POST Intermediate HR 0.48 0.51 0.54
BW 38.40 40.80 43.20
MO 83.52 88.74 93.96
YR 1002.24 1064.88 1127.52
7 POST Advanced HR 0.97 1.02 1.08
BW 77.60 81.60 86.40
MO 168.78 177.48 187.92
YR 2025.36 2129.76 2255.04
7 Uniform Incentive HR 1.45 1.53 1.62
BW 116.00 122.40 129.60
MO 252.30 266.22 281.88
YR 3027.60 3194.64 3382.56

- 140 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX E-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

 

 

1 2 3 5 6 7
DET-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 51.10 53.95, 56.95
8 BW 4088.00 4316.00 4556.00
MO 8891.40 9387.30 9909.30
YR 106696.80 112647.60 118911.60
8 POST Intermediate HR 0.51 0.54 0.57
BW 40.80 43.20 45.60
MO 88.74 93.96 99.18
YR 1064.88 1127.52 1190.16
8 POST Advanced HR 1.02 1.08 1.14
BW 81.60 86.40 91.20
MO 177.48 187.92 198.36
YR 2129.76 2255.04 2380.32
8 Uniform Incentive HR 1.53 1.62 1.71
BW 122.40 129.60 136.80
MO 266.22 281.88 297.54
YR 3194.64 3382.56 3570.48
8 Detective Incentive HR 0.51 0.54 0.57
BW 40.80 43.20 45.60
MO 88.74 93.96 99.18
YR 1064.88 1127.52 1190.16
LT-I Regular Pay HR 53.95 56.95, 60.12
9 BW 4316.00 4556.00 4809.60
MO 9387.30 9909.30 10460.88
YR 112647.60 118911.60 125530.56
9 POST Intermediate HR 0.54 0.57 0.60
BW 43.20 45.60 48.00
MO 93.96 99.18 104.40
YR 1127.52 1190.16 1252.80
9 POST Advanced HR 1.08 1.14 1.20
BW 86.40 91.20 96.00
MO 187.92 198.36 208.80
YR 2255.04 2380.32 2505.60
9 Uniform Incentive HR 1.62 1.71 1.80
BW 129.60 136.80 144.00
MO 281.88 297.54 313.20
YR 3382.56 3570.48 3758.40

-141-
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX E-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

 

2 5 6 7
LT-II Regular Pay HR 56.95 60.12 63.45
10 BW 4556.00 4809.60 5076.00
MO 9909.30 10460.88 11040.30
YR 118911.60 125530.56 132483.60
10 POST Intermediate HR 0.57 0.60 0.63
BW 45.60 48.00 50.40
MO 99.18 104.40 109.62
YR 1190.16 1252.80 1315.44
10 POST Advanced HR 1.14 1.20 1.27
BW 91.20 96.00 101.60
MO 198.36 208.80 220.98
YR 2380.32 2505.60 2651.76
10 Uniform Incentive HR 1.71 1.80 1.90
BW 136.80 144.00 152.00
MO 297.54 313.20 330.60
YR 3570.48 3758.40 3967.20
LTll
11 Regular Pay HR 60.12 63.45, 66.94
BW 4809.60 5076.00 5355.20
MO 10460.88 11040.30 11647.56
YR 125530.56 132483.60 139770.72
11 POST Intermediate HR 0.60 0.63 0.67
BW 48.00 50.40 53.60
MO 104.40 109.62 116.58
YR 1252.80 1315.44 1398.96
11 POST Advanced HR 1.20 1.27 1.34
BW 96.00 101.60 107.20
MO 208.80 220.98 233.16
YR 2505.60 2651.76 2797.92
11 Uniform Incentive HR 1.80 1.90 2.01
BW 144.00 152.00 160.80
MO 313.20 330.60 349.74
YR 3758.40 3967.20 4196.88

- 142 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX E-3 OPERATIVE JULY 1, 2013

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

2 5 6 7

LTll

12 Regular Pay HR 63.45 66.94 70.68
BW 5076.00 5355.20 5654.40
MO 11040.30 11647.56 12298.32
YR 132483.60 139770.72 147579.84

12 POST Intermediate HR 0.63 0.67 0.71
BW 50.40 53.60 56.80
MO 109.62 116.58 123.54
YR 1315.44 1398.96 1482.48

12 POST Advanced HR 1.27 1.34 1.41
BW 101.60 107.20 112.80
MO 220.98 233.16 245.34
YR 2651.76 2797.92 2944.08

12 Uniform Incentive HR 1.90 2.01 2.12
BW 152.00 160.80 169.60
MO 330.60 349.74 368.88
YR 3967.20 4196.88 4426.56

 

- 143 -
POLICE OFFICERS UNIT
APPENDIX F-1
OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

Code Class and Pay Grade Schedule
2214-1 Police Officer | A-1
2217 Police Specialist * A-2
2214-2 Police Officer II A-2
2214-3 Police Officer II! 3
2223-1 Police Detective | 5
2223-2 Police Detective I! 6
2223-3 Police Detective III 8
2227-1 Police Sergeant | 6
2227-2 Police Sergeant II 7
2232-1 Police Lieutenant | 9
2232-2 Police Lieutenant II 10

Biweekly/Monthly Longevity Compensation for Police Officers:

Years of Service Completed Biweekly Monthly
10 years and less than 15 years $91.20 $198.36
15 years and less than 20 years $182.40 $396.72
20 years of service and over $274.40 $596.82

Salary Tables:
Appendix F-2 Regular Pay
Appendix F-3 Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives

* Police Specialist (Schedule A-2) The regular pay for this class is a salary range from PO-I to the top
step of PO-Il and is dependent upon the member's education and experience. Individuals in this
class may receive any POST bonus and/or Uniform Field Officers Incentive if so qualified.

- 144 -
CLASS
SCHEDULE

PO-&ll

A

PO-|

PO-II

PO-III

DET-I

DET-II

SGT-I

SGT-II

DET-III

LT-

LT-II

10

11

12

HR
BW
MO
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

23.44
1875.20
4078.56

48942.72

29.30
2344.00
5098.20

61178.40

REGULAR PAY

4

26.74
2139.20
4652.76

55833.12

33.45
2676.00
5820.30

69843.60

35.29
2823.20
6140.46

73685.52

37.26
2980.80
6483.24

APPENDIX F-2
OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013
2 3
24.39 25.34
1951.20 2027.20
4243.86 4409.16
$0926.32 52909.92
30.48 31.67
2438.40 2533.60
5303.52 5510.58
63642.24 66126.96
31.67 33.45,
2533.60 2676.00
5510.58 5820.30
66126.96 69843.60
33.45, 35.29
2676.00 2823.20
5820.30 6140.46
69843.60 73685.52

77798.88

39.34
3147.20
6845.16

82141.92

41.52
3321.60
7224.48

86693.76

29.30
2344.00
5098.20

61178.40

35.29
2823.20
6140.46

73685.52

37.26
2980.80
6483.24

77798.88

39.34
3147.20
6845.16

82141.92

41.52
3321.60
7224.48

86693.76

43.89
3511.20
7636.86

91642.32

46.30
3704.00
8056.20

96674.40

48.87
3909.60
8503.38

102040.56

51.61
4128.80
8980.14

107761.68

54.49
4359.20
9481.26

113775.12

57.52
4601.60
10008.48
120101.76

60.72
4857.60
10565.28
126783.36

64.08
5126.40
11149.92
133799.04

30.48
2438.40
5303.52

63642.24

37.26
2980.80
6483.24

77798.88

39.34
3147.20
6845.16

82141.92

41.52
3321.60
7224.48

86693.76

43.89
3511.20
7636.86

91642.32

46.30
3704.00
8056.20

96674.40

48.87
3909.60
8503.38

102040.56

51.61
4128.80
8980.14

107761.68

54.49
4359.20
9481.26

113775.12

57.52
4601.60
10008.48
120101.76

60.72
4857.60
10565.28
126783.36

64.08
5126.40
11149.92
133799.04

67.61
5408.80
11764.14
141169.68

31.67
2533.60
5510.58

66126.96

39.34
3147.20
6845.16

82141.92

41.52
3321.60
7224.48

86693.76

43.89
3511.20
7636.86

91642.32

46.30
3704.00
8056.20

96674.40

48.87
3909.60
8503.38

102040.56

51.61
4128.80
8980.14

107761.68

54.49
4359.20
9481.26

113775.12

57.52
4601.60
10008.48
120101.76

60.72
4857.60
10565.28
126783.36

64.08
5126.40
11149.92
133799.04

67.61
5408.80
11764.14
141169.68

71.39
5711.20
12421.86
149062.32

 

= 145 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX F-3 OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-l&ll Regular Pay HR 23.44 24.39 25.34 26.74 29.30 30.48, 31.67
A BW 1875.20 1951.20 2027.20 2139.20 2344.00 2438.40 2533.60
MO 4078.56 4243.86 4409.16 4652.76 5098.20 5303.52 5510.58
YR 48942.72 50926.32 52909.92 55833.12 61178.40 63642.24 66126.96
A POST Intermediate HR 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.27 0.29 0.30 0.32
BW 18.40 19.20 20.00 21.60 23.20 24.00 25.60
MO 40.02 41.76 43.50 46.98 50.46 52.20 55.68
YR 480.24 501.12 522.00 563.76 605.52 626.40 668.16
A POST Advanced HR 0.47 0.49 0.51 0.53 0.59 0.61 0.63
BW 37.60 39.20 40.80 42.40 47.20 48.80 50.40
MO 81.78 85.26 88.74 92.22 102.66 106.14 109.62
YR 981.36 1023.12 1064.88 1106.64 1231.92 1273.68 1315.44
A Uniform Incentive HR 0.70 0.73 0.76 0.80 0.88 0.91 0.95
BW 56.00 58.40 60.80 64.00 70.40 72.80 76.00
MO 121.80 127.02 132.24 139.20 153.12 158.34 165.30
YR 1461.60 1524.24 1586.88 1670.40 1837.44 1900.08 1983.60
PO-I Regular Pay HR 29.30 30.48, 31.67 33.45 35.29 37.26 39.34
1 BW 2344.00 2438.40 2533.60 2676.00 2823.20 2980.80 3147.20
MO 5098.20 5303.52 5510.58 5820.30 6140.46 6483.24 6845.16
YR 61178.40 63642.24 66126.96 69843.60 73685.52 77798.88 82141.92
1 POST Intermediate HR 0.29 0.30 0.32 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39
BW 23.20 24.00 25.60 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20
MO 50.46 52.20 55.68 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86
YR 605.52 626.40 668.16 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32
1 POST Advanced HR 0.59 0.61 0.63 0.67 0.71 0.75 0.79
BW 47.20 48.80 50.40 53.60 56.80 60.00 63.20
MO 102.66 106.14 109.62 116.58 123.54 130.50 137.46
YR 1231.92 1273.68 1315.44 1398.96 1482.48 1566.00 1649.52
1 Uniform Incentive HR 0.88 0.91 0.95 1.00 1.06 1.12 1.18
BW 70.40 72.80 76.00 80.00 84.80 89.60 94.40
MO 153.12 158.34 165.30 174.00 184.44 194.88 205.32
YR 1837.44 1900.08 1983.60 2088.00 2213.28 2338.56 2463.84

 

- 146 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX F-3 OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-II — Regular Pay HR 31.67 33.45 35.29 37.26 39.34 41.52
2 BW 2533.60 2676.00 2823.20 2980.80 3147.20 3321.60
MO 5510.58 5820.30 6140.46 6483.24 6845.16 7224.48
YR 66126.96 69843.60 73685.52 77798.88 82141.92 86693.76
2 POST Intermediate HR 0.32 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39 0.42
BW 25.60 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20 33.60
MO 55.68 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86 73.08
YR 668.16 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32 876.96
2 POST Advanced HR 0.63 0.67 0.71 0.75 0.79 0.83
BW 50.40 53.60 56.80 60.00 63.20 66.40
MO 109.62 116.58 123.54 130.50 137.46 144.42
YR 1315.44 1398.96 1482.48 1566.00 1649.52 1733.04
2 Uniform Incentive HR 0.95 1.00 1.06 1.12 1.18 1.25
BW 76.00 80.00 84.80 89.60 94.40 100.00
MO 165.30 174.00 184.44 194.88 205.32 217.50
YR 1983.60 2088.00 2213.28 2338.56 2463.84 2610.00
PO-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 33.45 35.29 37.26 39.34 41.52 43.89
3 BW 2676.00 2823.20 2980.80 3147.20 3321.60 3511.20
MO 5820.30 6140.46 6483.24 6845.16 7224.48 7636.86
YR 69843.60 73685.52 77798.88 82141.92 86693.76 91642.32
3 POST Intermediate HR 0.33 0.35 0.37 0.39 0.42 0.44
BW 26.40 28.00 29.60 31.20 33.60 35.20
MO 57.42 60.90 64.38 67.86 73.08 76.56
YR 689.04 730.80 772.56 814.32 876.96 918.72
3 POST Advanced HR 0.67 0.71 0.75 0.79 0.83 0.88
BW 53.60 56.80 60.00 63.20 66.40 70.40
MO 116.58 123.54 130.50 137.46 144.42 153.12
YR 1398.96 1482.48 1566.00 1649.52 1733.04 1837.44
3 Uniform Incentive HR 1.00 1.06 1.12 1.18 1.25 1.32
BW 80.00 84.80 89.60 94.40 100.00 105.60
MO 174.00 184.44 194.88 205.32 217.50 229.68
YR 2088.00 2213.28 2338.56 2463.84 2610.00 2756.16

 

- 147 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX F-3 OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO III
4 Regular Pay HR 39.34 41.52 43.89 46.30
BW 3147.20 3321.60 3511.20 3704.00
MO 6845.16 7224.48 7636.86 8056.20
YR 82141.92 86693.76 91642.32 96674.40
4 POST Intermediate HR 0.39 0.42 0.44 0.46
BW 31.20 33.60 35.20 36.80
MO 67.86 73.08 76.56 80.04
YR 814.32 876.96 918.72 960.48
4 POST Advanced HR 0.79 0.83 0.88 0.93
BW 63.20 66.40 70.40 74.40
MO 137.46 144.42 153.12 161.82
YR 1649.52 1733.04 1837.44 1941.84
4 Uniform Incentive HR 1.18 1.25 1.32 1.39
BW 94.40 100.00 105.60 111.20
MO 205.32 217.50 229.68 241.86
YR 2463.84 2610.00 2756.16 2902.32
DET-| Regular Pay HR 41.52 43.89 46.30 48.87
5 BW 3321.60 3511.20 3704.00 3909.60
MO 7224.48 7636.86 8056.20 8503.38
YR 86693.76 91642.32 96674.40 102040.56
5 POST Intermediate HR 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.49
BW 33.60 35.20 36.80 39.20
MO 73.08 76.56 80.04 85.26
YR 876.96 918.72 960.48 1023.12
5 POST Advanced HR 0.83 0.88 0.93 0.98
BW 66.40 70.40 74.40 78.40
MO 144.42 153.12 161.82 170.52
YR 1733.04 1837.44 1941.84 2046.24
5 Uniform Incentive HR 1.25 1.32 1.39 1.47
BW 100.00 105.60 111.20 117.60
MO 217.50 229.68 241.86 255.78
YR 2610.00 2756.16 2902.32 3069.36
5 Detective Incentive HR 0.42 0.44 0.48 0.49
BW 33.60 35.20 38.08 39.20
MO 73.08 76.56 82.82 85.26
YR 876.96 918.72 993.89 1023.12

 

- 148 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX F-3 OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-Il Regular Pay HR 46.30 48.87 51.61
SGT-I BW 3704.00 3909.60 4128.80
6 MO 8056.20 8503.38 8980.14
YR 96674.40 102040.56 107761.68
6 POST Intermediate HR 0.46 0.49 0.52
BW 36.80 39.20 41.60
MO 80.04 85.26 90.48
YR 960.48 1023.12 1085.76
6 POST Advanced HR 0.93 0.98 1.03
BW 74.40 78.40 82.40
MO 161.82 170.52 179.22
YR 1941.84 2046.24 2150.64
6 Uniform Incentive HR 1.39 1.47 1.55
BW 111.20 117.60 124.00
MO 241.86 255.78 269.70
YR 2902.32 3069.36 3236.40
6 Detective Incentive HR 0.46 0.49 0.52
BW 36.80 39.20 41.60
MO 80.04 85.26 90.48
YR 960.48 1023.12 1085.76
SGT-Il_ Regular Pay HR 48.87 51.61 54.49
7 BW 3909.60 4128.80 4359.20
MO 8503.38 8980.14 9481.26
YR 102040.56 107761.68 113775.12
7 POST Intermediate HR 0.49 0.52 0.54
BW 39.20 41.60 43.20
MO 85.26 90.48. 93.96
YR 1023.12 1085.76 1127.52
7 POST Advanced HR 0.98 1.03 1.09
BW 78.40 82.40 87.20
MO 170.52 179.22 189.66
YR 2046.24 2150.64 2275.92
7 Uniform Incentive HR 1.47 1.55 1.63
BW 117.60 124.00 130.40
MO 255.78 269.70 283.62
YR 3069.36 3236.40 3403.44

- 149 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX F-3 OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 51.61 54.49 57.52
8 BW 4128.80 4359.20 4601.60
MO 8980.14 9481.26 10008.48
YR 107761.68 113775.12 120101.76
8 POST Intermediate HR 0.52 0.54 0.58
BW 41.60 43.20 46.40
MO 90.48 93.96 100.92
YR 1085.76 1127.52 1211.04
8 POST Advanced HR 1.03 1.09 1.15
BW 82.40 87.20 92.00
MO 179.22 189.66 200.10
YR 2150.64 2275.92 2401.20
8 Uniform Incentive HR 1.55 1.63 1.73
BW 124.00 130.40 138.40
MO 269.70 283.62 301.02
YR 3236.40 3403.44 3612.24
8 Detective Incentive HR 0.52 0.54 0.58
BW 41.60 43.20 46.40
MO 90.48 93.96 100.92
YR 1085.76 1127.52 1211.04
LT-I Regular Pay HR 54.49 57.52 60.72
9 BW 4359.20 4601.60 4857.60
MO 9481.26 10008.48 10565.28
YR 113775.12 120101.76 126783.36
9 POST Intermediate HR 0.54 0.58 0.61
BW 43.20 46.40 48.80
MO 93.96 100.92 106.14
YR 1127.52 1211.04 1273.68
9 POST Advanced HR 1.09 1.15 1.21
BW 87.20 92.00 96.80
MO 189.66 200.10 210.54
YR 2275.92 2401.20 2526.48
9 Uniform Incentive HR 1.63 1.73 1.82
BW 130.40 138.40 145.60
MO 283.62 301.02 316.68
YR 3403.44 3612.24 3800.16

- 150 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX F-3 OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

 

2 5 6 7
LT-II Regular Pay HR 57.52 60.72 64.08
10 BW 4601.60 4857.60 5126.40
MO 10008.48 10565.28 11149.92
YR 120101.76 126783.36 133799.04
10 POST Intermediate HR 0.58 0.61 0.64
BW 46.40 48.80 51.20
MO 100.92 106.14 111.36
YR 1211.04 1273.68 1336.32
10 POST Advanced HR 1.15 1.21 1.28
BW 92.00 96.80 102.40
MO 200.10 210.54 222.72
YR 2401.20 2526.48 2672.64
10 Uniform Incentive HR 1.73 1.82 1.92
BW 138.40 145.60 153.60
MO 301.02 316.68 334.08
YR 3612.24 3800.16 4008.96
LTll
11 Regular Pay HR 60.72 64.08 67.61
BW 4857.60 5126.40 5408.80
MO 10565.28 11149.92 11764.14
YR 126783.36 133799.04 141169.68
11 POST Intermediate HR 0.61 0.64 0.68
BW 48.80 51.20 54.40
MO 106.14 111.36 118.32
YR 1273.68 1336.32 1419.84
11 POST Advanced HR 1.21 1.28 1.35
BW 96.80 102.40 108.00
MO 210.54 222.72 234.90
YR 2526.48 2672.64 2818.80
11 Uniform Incentive HR 1.82 1.92 2.03
BW 145.60 153.60 162.40
MO 316.68 334.08 353.22
YR 3800.16 4008.96 4238.64

- 151 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX F-3 OPERATIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2013

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

2 5 6 7

LTll

12 Regular Pay HR 64.08 67.61 71.39
BW 5126.40 5408.80 5711.20
MO 11149.92 11764.14 12421.86
YR 133799.04 141169.68 149062.32

12 POST Intermediate HR 0.64 0.68 0.71
BW 51.20 54.40 56.80
MO 111.36 118.32 123.54
YR 1336.32 1419.84 1482.48

12 POST Advanced HR 1.28 1.35 1.43
BW 102.40 108.00 114.40
MO 222.72 234.90 248.82
YR 2672.64 2818.80 2985.84

12 Uniform Incentive HR 1.92 2.03 2.14
BW 153.60 162.40 171.20
MO 334.08 353.22 372.36
YR 4008.96 4238.64 4468.32

 

- 152 -
POLICE OFFICERS UNIT
APPENDIX G-1
OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

Code Class and Pay Grade Schedule
2214-1 Police Officer | A-1
2217 Police Specialist * A-2
2214-2 Police Officer II A-2
2214-3 Police Officer II! 3
2223-1 Police Detective | 5
2223-2 Police Detective I! 6
2223-3 Police Detective III 8
2227-1 Police Sergeant | 6
2227-2 Police Sergeant II 7
2232-1 Police Lieutenant | 9
2232-2 Police Lieutenant II 10

Biweekly/Monthly Longevity Compensation for Police Officers:

Years of Service Completed Biweekly Monthly
10 years and less than 15 years $92.80 $201.84
15 years and less than 20 years $186.40 $405.42
20 years of service and over $279.20 $607.26

Salary Tables:
Appendix G-2 Regular Pay
Appendix G-3 Regular Pay, plus POST Bonuses and Incentives

* Police Specialist (Schedule A-2) The regular pay for this class is a salary range from PO-I to the top
step of PO-Il and is dependent upon the member's education and experience. Individuals in this
class may receive any POST bonus and/or Uniform Field Officers Incentive if so qualified.

- 153 -
CLASS
SCHEDULE

PO-&ll

A

PO-|

PO-II

PO-III

DET-I

DET-II

SGT-I

SGT-II

DET-III

LT-

LT-II

10

11

12

HR
BW
MO
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

HR
BW
MO.
YR

23.91
1912.80
4160.34

49924.08

29.89
2391.20
5200.86

62410.32

REGULAR PAY

4

27.27
2181.60
4744.98

56939.76

34.12
2729.60
5936.88

71242.56

36.00
2880.00
6264.00

75168.00

38.28
3062.40
6660.72

APPENDIX G-2
OPERATIVE March 1, 2014
2 3
24.88 25.85
1990.40 2068.00
4329.12 4497.90
51949.44 53974.80
31.09 32.30
2487.20 2584.00
5409.66 5620.20
64915.92 67442.40
32.30 34.12
2584.00 2729.60
5620.20 5936.88
67442.40 71242.56
34.12 36.00
2729.60 2880.00
5936.88 6264.00
71242.56 75168.00

79928.64

40.13
3210.40
6982.62

83791.44

42.35
3388.00
7368.90

88426.80

29.89
2391.20
5200.86

62410.32

36.00
2880.00
6264.00

75168.00

38.28
3062.40
6660.72

79928.64

40.13
3210.40
6982.62

83791.44

42.35
3388.00
7368.90

88426.80

44.77
3581.60
7789.98

93479.76

47.23
3778.40
8218.02

98616.24

49.85
3988.00
8673.90

104086.80

52.64
4211.20
9159.36

109912.32

55.58
4446.40
9670.92

116051.04

58.67
4693.60
10208.58
122502.96

61.93
4954.40
10775.82
129309.84

65.36
5228.80
11372.64
136471.68

31.09
2487.20
5409.66

64915.92

38.28
3062.40
6660.72

79928.64

40.13
3210.40
6982.62

83791.44

42.35
3388.00
7368.90

88426.80

44.77
3581.60
7789.98

93479.76

47.23
3778.40
8218.02

98616.24

49.85
3988.00
8673.90

104086.80

52.64
4211.20
9159.36

109912.32

55.58
4446.40
9670.92

116051.04

58.67
4693.60
10208.58
122502.96

61.93
4954.40
10775.82
129309.84

65.36
5228.80
11372.64
136471.68

68.96
5516.80
11999.04
143988.48

32.30
2584.00
5620.20

67442.40

40.13
3210.40
6982.62

83791.44

42.35
3388.00
7368.90

88426.80

44.77
3581.60
7789.98

93479.76

47.23
3778.40
8218.02

98616.24

49.85,
3988.00
8673.90

104086.80

52.64
4211.20
9159.36

109912.32

55.58
4446.40
9670.92

116051.04

58.67
4693.60
10208.58
122502.96

61.93
4954.40
10775.82
129309.84

65.36
5228.80
11372.64
136471.68

68.96
5516.80
11999.04
143988.48

72.82
5825.60
12670.68
152048.16

 

- 154 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX G-3 OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-l&ll Regular Pay HR 23.91 24.88 25.85 27.27 29.89 31.09 32.30
A BW 1912.80 1990.40 2068.00 2181.60 2391.20 2487.20 2584.00
MO 4160.34 4329.12 4497.90 4744.98 5200.86 5409.66 5620.20
YR 49924.08 51949.44 53974.80 56939.76 62410.32 64915.92 67442.40
A POST Intermediate HR 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.27 0.30 0.31 0.32
BW 19.20 20.00 20.80 21.60 24.00 24.80 25.60
MO 41.76 43.50 45.24 46.98 52.20 53.94 55.68
YR 501.12 522.00 542.88 563.76 626.40 647.28 668.16
A POST Advanced HR 0.48 0.50 0.52 0.55 0.60 0.62 0.65
BW 38.40 40.00 41.60 44.00 48.00 49.60 52.00
MO 83.52 87.00 90.48 95.70 104.40 107.88 113.10
YR 1002.24 1044.00 1085.76 1148.40 1252.80 1294.56 1357.20
A Uniform Incentive HR 0.72 0.75 0.78 0.82 0.90 0.93 0.97
BW 57.60 60.00 62.40 65.60 72.00 74.40 77.60
MO 125.28 130.50 135.72 142.68 156.60 161.82 168.78
YR 1503.36 1566.00 1628.64 1712.16 1879.20 1941.84 2025.36
PO-I Regular Pay HR 29.89 31.09 32.30 34.12 36.00 38.28 40.13
1 BW 2391.20 2487.20 2584.00 2729.60 2880.00 3062.40 3210.40
MO 5200.86 5409.66 5620.20 5936.88 6264.00 6660.72 6982.62
YR  62410.32 64915.92 67442.40 71242.56 75168.00 79928.64 83791.44
1 POST Intermediate HR 0.30 0.31 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40
BW 24.00 24.80 25.60 27.20 28.80 30.40 32.00
MO 52.20 53.94 55.68 59.16 62.64 66.12 69.60
YR 626.40 647.28 668.16 709.92 751.68 793.44 835.20
1 POST Advanced HR 0.60 0.62 0.65 0.68 0.72 0.77 0.80
BW 48.00 49.60 52.00 54.40 57.60 61.60 64.00
MO 104.40 107.88 113.10 118.32 125.28 133.98 139.20
YR 1252.80 1294.56 1357.20 1419.84 1503.36 1607.76 1670.40
1 Uniform Incentive HR 0.90 0.93 0.97 1.02 1.08 1.15 1.20
BW 72.00 74.40 77.60 81.60 86.40 92.00 96.00
MO 156.60 161.82 168.78 177.48 187.92 200.10 208.80
YR 1879.20 1941.84 2025.36 2129.76 2255.04 2401.20 2505.60

 

- 155 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX G-3 OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO-II — Regular Pay HR 32.30 34.12 36.00 38.28 40.13 42.35
2 BW 2584.00 2729.60 2880.00 3062.40 3210.40 3388.00
MO 5620.20 5936.88 6264.00 6660.72 6982.62 7368.90
YR 67442.40 71242.56 75168.00 79928.64 83791.44 88426.80
2 POST Intermediate HR 0.32 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42
BW 25.60 27.20 28.80 30.40 32.00 33.60
MO 55.68 59.16 62.64 66.12 69.60 73.08
YR 668.16 709.92 751.68 793.44 835.20 876.96
2 POST Advanced HR 0.65 0.68 0.72 0.77 0.80 0.85
BW 52.00 54.40 57.60 61.60 64.00 68.00
MO 113.10 118.32 125.28 133.98 139.20 147.90
YR 1357.20 1419.84 1503.36 1607.76 1670.40 1774.80
2 Uniform Incentive HR 0.97 1.02 1.08 1.15 1.20 1.27
BW 77.60 81.60 86.40 92.00 96.00 101.60
MO 168.78 177.48 187.92 200.10 208.80 220.98
YR 2025.36 2129.76 2255.04 2401.20 2505.60 2651.76
PO-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 34.12 36.00 38.28 40.13 42.35, 44.77
3 BW 2729.60 2880.00 3062.40 3210.40 3388.00 3581.60
MO 5936.88 6264.00 6660.72 6982.62 7368.90 7789.98
YR 71242.56 75168.00 79928.64 83791.44 88426.80 93479.76
3 POST Intermediate HR 0.34 0.36 0.38 0.40 0.42 0.45
BW 27.20 28.80 30.40 32.00 33.60 36.00
MO 59.16 62.64 66.12 69.60 73.08 78.30
YR 709.92 751.68 793.44 835.20 876.96 939.60
3 POST Advanced HR 0.68 0.72 0.77 0.80 0.85 0.90
BW 54.40 57.60 61.60 64.00 68.00 72.00
MO 118.32 125.28 133.98 139.20 147.90 156.60
YR 1419.84 1503.36 1607.76 1670.40 1774.80 1879.20
3 Uniform Incentive HR 1.02 1.08 1.15 1.20 1.27 1.34
BW 81.60 86.40 92.00 96.00 101.60 107.20
MO 177.48 187.92 200.10 208.80 220.98 233.16
YR 2129.76 2255.04 2401.20 2505.60 2651.76 2797.92

 

- 156 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

PLUS INCENTIVES

APPENDIX G-3 OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
PO III
4 Regular Pay HR 40.13 42.35, 44.77 47.23
BW 3210.40 3388.00 3581.60 3778.40
MO 6982.62 7368.90 7789.98 8218.02
YR 83791.44 88426.80 93479.76 98616.24
4 POST Intermediate HR 0.40 0.42 0.45 0.47
BW 32.00 33.60 36.00 37.60
MO 69.60 73.08 78.30 81.78
YR 835.20 876.96 939.60 981.36
4 POST Advanced HR 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.94
BW 64.00 68.00 72.00 75.20
MO 139.20 147.90 156.60 163.56
YR 1670.40 1774.80 1879.20 1962.72
4 Uniform Incentive HR 1.20 1.27 1.34 1.42
BW 96.00 101.60 107.20 113.60
MO 208.80 220.98 233.16 247.08
YR 2505.60 2651.76 2797.92 2964.96
DET-| Regular Pay HR 42.35 44.77 47.23 49.85
5 BW 3388.00 3581.60 3778.40 3988.00
MO 7368.90 7789.98 8218.02 8673.90
YR 88426.80 93479.76 98616.24 104086.80
5 POST Intermediate HR 0.42 0.45 0.47 0.50
BW 33.60 36.00 37.60 40.00
MO 73.08 78.30 81.78 87.00
YR 876.96 939.60 981.36 1044.00
5 POST Advanced HR 0.85 0.90 0.94 1.00
BW 68.00 72.00 75.20 80.00
MO 147.90 156.60 163.56 174.00
YR 1774.80 1879.20 1962.72 2088.00
5 Uniform Incentive HR 1.27 1.34 1.42 1.50
BW 101.60 107.20 113.60 120.00
MO 220.98 233.16 247.08 261.00
YR 2651.76 2797.92 2964.96 3132.00
5 Detective Incentive HR 0.42 0.45 0.47 0.50
BW 33.60 36.00 37.60 40.00
MO 73.08 78.30 81.78 87.00
YR 876.96 939.60 981.36 1044.00

 

-157-
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX G-3 OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

 

 

2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-Il Regular Pay HR 47.23 49.85, 52.64
SGT-I BW 3778.40 3988.00 4211.20
6 MO 8218.02 8673.90 9159.36
YR 98616.24 104086.80 109912.32
6 POST Intermediate HR 0.47 0.50 0.53
BW 37.60 40.00 42.40
MO 81.78 87.00 92.22
YR 981.36 1044.00 1106.64
6 POST Advanced HR 0.94 1.00 1.05
BW 75.20 80.00 84.00
MO 163.56 174.00 182.70
YR 1962.72 2088.00 2192.40
6 Uniform Incentive HR 1.42 1.50 1.58
BW 113.60 120.00 126.40
MO 247.08 261.00 274.92
YR 2964.96 3132.00 3299.04
6 Detective Incentive HR 0.47 0.50 0.53
BW 37.60 40.00 42.40
MO 81.78 87.00 92.22
YR 981.36 1044.00 1106.64
SGT-Il_ Regular Pay HR 49.85, 52.64 55.58
7 BW 3988.00 4211.20 4446.40
MO 8673.90 9159.36 9670.92
YR 104086.80 109912.32 116051.04
7 POST Intermediate HR 0.50 0.53 0.56
BW 40.00 42.40 44.80
MO 87.00 92.22 97.44
YR 1044.00 1106.64 1169.28
7 POST Advanced HR 1.00 1.05 1.11
BW 80.00 84.00 88.80
MO 174.00 182.70 193.14
YR 2088.00 2192.40 2317.68
7 Uniform Incentive HR 1.50 1.58 1.67
BW 120.00 126.40 133.60
MO 261.00 274.92 290.58
YR 3132.00 3299.04 3486.96

- 158 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS
PLUS INCENTIVES
APPENDIX G-3 OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

 

 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
DET-IIl_ Regular Pay HR 52.64 55.58, 58.67
8 BW 4211.20 4446.40 4693.60
MO 9159.36 9670.92 10208.58
YR 109912.32 116051.04 122502.96
8 POST Intermediate HR 0.53 0.56 0.59
BW 42.40 44.80 47.20
MO 92.22 97.44 102.66
YR 1106.64 1169.28 1231.92
8 POST Advanced HR 1.05 1.11 1.17
BW 84.00 88.80 93.60
MO 182.70 193.14 203.58
YR 2192.40 2317.68 2442.96
8 Uniform Incentive HR 1.58 1.67 1.76
BW 126.40 133.60 140.80
MO 274.92 290.58 306.24
YR 3299.04 3486.96 3674.88
8 Detective Incentive HR 0.53 0.56 0.59
BW 42.40 44.80 47.20
MO 92.22 97.44 102.66
YR 1106.64 1169.28 1231.92
LT-I Regular Pay HR 55.58 58.67 61.93
9 BW 4446.40 4693.60 4954.40
MO 9670.92 10208.58 10775.82
YR 116051.04 122502.96 129309.84
9 POST Intermediate HR 0.56 0.59 0.62
BW 44.80 47.20 49.60
MO 97.44 102.66 107.88
YR 1169.28 1231.92 1294.56
9 POST Advanced HR 1.11 1.17 1.24
BW 88.80 93.60 99.20
MO 193.14 203.58 215.76
YR 2317.68 2442.96 2589.12
9 Uniform Incentive HR 1.67 1.76 1.86
BW 133.60 140.80 148.80
MO 290.58 306.24 323.64
YR 3486.96 3674.88 3883.68

- 159 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX G-3 OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

 

2 5 6 7
LT-II Regular Pay HR 58.67 61.93 65.36
10 BW 4693.60 4954.40 5228.80
MO 10208.58 10775.82 11372.64
YR 122502.96 129309.84 136471.68
10 POST Intermediate HR 0.59 0.62 0.65
BW 47.20 49.60 52.00
MO 102.66 107.88 113.10
YR 1231.92 1294.56 1357.20
10 POST Advanced HR 1.17 1.24 1.31
BW 93.60 99.20 104.80
MO 203.58 215.76 227.94
YR 2442.96 2589.12 2735.28
10 Uniform Incentive HR 1.76 1.86 1.96
BW 140.80 148.80 156.80
MO 306.24 323.64 341.04
YR 3674.88 3883.68 4092.48
LTll
11 Regular Pay HR 61.93 65.36 68.96
BW 4954.40 5228.80 5516.80
MO 10775.82 11372.64 11999.04
YR 129309.84 136471.68 143988.48
11 POST Intermediate HR 0.62 0.65 0.69
BW 49.60 52.00 55.20
MO 107.88 113.10 120.06
YR 1294.56 1357.20 1440.72
11 POST Advanced HR 1.24 1.31 1.38
BW 99.20 104.80 110.40
MO 215.76 227.94 240.12
YR 2589.12 2735.28 2881.44
11 Uniform Incentive HR 1.86 1.96 2.07
BW 148.80 156.80 165.60
MO 323.64 341.04 360.18
YR 3883.68 4092.48 4322.16

- 160 -
REGULAR PAY PLUS ALL POSTS

APPENDIX G-3 OPERATIVE MARCH 1, 2014

PLUS INCENTIVES

 

2 5 6 7

LTll

12 Regular Pay HR 65.36 68.96 72.82
BW 5228.80 5516.80 5825.60
MO 11372.64 11999.04 12670.68
YR 136471.68 143988.48 152048.16

12 POST Intermediate HR 0.65 0.69 0.73
BW 52.00 55.20 58.40
MO 113.10 120.06 127.02
YR 1357.20 1440.72 1524.24

12 POST Advanced HR 1.31 1.38 1.46
BW 104.80 110.40 116.80
MO 227.94 240.12 254.04
YR 2735.28 2881.44 3048.48

12 Uniform Incentive HR 1.96 2.07 2.18
BW 156.80 165.60 174.40
MO 341.04 360.18 379.32
YR 4092.48 4322.16 4551.84

 

- 161 -
APPENDIX H

Salary Administration

(a)

Salary upon Initial Appointment and Salary Progression.
Initial appointment in the police service shall be at the first step of the first Schedule
except as hereinafter provided.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Any person initially appointed to any position in the class of Police Officer,
who has completed 60 semester units (or 90 quarter units) of credit from an
accredited college or university pertinent to the occupation involved, upon
recommendation of the appointing authority and approval of the General
Manager of the Personnel Department, shall receive salary at the second
step of the first Schedule in the MOU.

Any person initially appointed to any position in the class of Police Officer,
who has obtained a pertinent bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or
university, upon recommendation of the Chief of Police and approval of the
General Manager of the Personnel Department, shall receive salary at the
third step of the first Schedule in the MOU.

Any person initially appointed to any position in the class of Police Officer,
who has had acceptable service in the police department of another public
agency, or who is reappointed to said class and has had previous acceptable
service as a member of the Police Department, shall receive a salary at a
step rate of the first Schedule in the MOU determined in accordance with the
foregoing paragraphs, plus one step for each two years of such service, but
no higher than the fourth step of the first Schedule. To be acceptable, such
service must be approved by the General Manager of the Personnel
Department.

Every Police Officer who completes six months or more service shall, at the
beginning of the pay period immediately following such completion, be
advanced in pay to the next higher step in the range for the first Schedule in
the MOU. Thereafter, advancements in salary shall be made automatically,
step by step, after each year of aggregate active service in the class and pay
grade in which the member is employed to the maximum step rate within the
salary schedule prescribed for his/her class and pay grade, subject to the
provisions of Subsection (e) of this section.

Except as provided in Subdivision (4) of this subsection, advancement in the
salary rate of a member shall be made automatically after one year of
aggregate active service as each step rate until he/she receives salary at the
maximum step rate within the salary schedule prescribed for his/her class
and pay grade, subject to the provisions of Subsections (e) and (f) of this
section.

The salary upon initial appointment and salary progression for the class of
Police Specialist, Code 2217, shall be the same as Police Officer |, Code
2214-1, and Police Officer Il, Code 2214-2, set forth above. In exceptional
cases, upon request from the Chief of Police, the City Administrative Officer

- 162 -
(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

may approve advance step hiring upon demonstrated need and qualifications
of the individual.

Employees in the class of Police Specialist shall receive the Uniform Field Officer
Incentive, if qualified, and all benefits afforded to the parallel classes shown above
as contained in the MOU.

Salary Advancement upon Promotion or Assignment to Higher Pay Grade.
Any member of the Police Department promoted to a higher class or assigned to a
higher pay grade within the class to which he/she was appointed shall be advanced
to the lowest rate of the salary schedule for the higher class or pay grade, or the rate
of compensation next higher to that received by him/her prior to such promotion,
whichever is the greater. If the member is entitled to a step advancement pursuant
to Subdivision (5) of Subsection (a) of this section on the same day as such
promotion or assignment, the step advancement shall be considered to have
occurred prior to such promotion or assignment. Provided, however, that if such
person prior to promotion or assignment is receiving special or hazard pay as
provided in Appendix E of this MOU, his/her salary rate prior to promotion or
assignment shall be deemed to be the rate which he/she would be receiving in the
absence of such salary premium.

Salary Rate upon Assignment to a Lower Job Class.

Any member of the Police Department reassigned to a lower pay grade within the
class of position to which he/she was appointed shall receive the same
compensation received by him/her prior to such reassignment, or be compensated
at the top step of the schedule for the lowest pay grade, whichever is lower.

Salary Rate upon Lateral Transfer.

Whenever any member of the Police Department is appointed to or displaces in a
position in the same department in a different class and pay grade having the same
salary schedule he/she shall be entitled to receive in the position to which he/she is
appointed or in which he/she displaces, the same rate of compensation that he/she
was receiving prior to such appointment or displacement less special hazard and
longevity pay, unless he/she is entitled to receive such pay by applicable provision
of this article in his/her new position.

Any member in the class of Police Specialist who successfully completes 18 months
of service in that class, shall then be moved into the class of Police Officer under
Charter Section 1014. Upon appointment to the class of Police Officer, such
member shall be placed in the same step as occupied in the previous class.

Merit Pay Step in Schedules 1 through 12.

Receipt of salary at the maximum or at the sixth step in Schedules 1 through 12 isa
privilege to be earned and retained on the basis of merit, and not a right. No
member of the Police Department in a position compensated at Schedules 1 through
12 may receive salary at the seventh step [including advancement pursuant to
Section 4.159 (a) (4)] until the Chief Administrative Officer of his department, or the

- 163 -
person designated by the officer, certifies to the Controller that the member has
completed the required period of service in his class and further certifies either: (1)
that he finds the member's standard of service to be satisfactory; or (2) that three
departmental deputy chiefs, sitting as a board of review, find his standard of service
to be satisfactory. Any such designation shall be made in writing to the Controller.

Note: An employee who is absent during all or a portion of the one year of service
during which the requisite standard of service must be maintained to qualify for merit
pay shall not be certified as being eligible for such pay until and unless his or her
performance has been observed for the full qualifying period and such service has
met the required standard.

A member being compensated at the seventh step shall receive an initial salary
increase on promotion or assignment to a higher pay grade without the necessity for
further certification. If at any time the standard of service of a member who is
receiving salary at the seventh step is unsatisfactory as confirmed by three
departmental deputy chiefs, sitting as a board of review, the Chief Administrative
Officer of his department may so certify to the Controller, and in that event the salary
of such member shall revert from the seventh step to the sixth step and he shall not
again be advanced to the seventh step unless and until the Chief Administrative
Officer certifies that, in his opinion, or in the opinion of three deputy chiefs, sitting as
a board of review, such member has achieved a satisfactory standard of service.
Whenever the Chief Administrative Officer finds that a member's standard of service
is unsatisfactory and for that reason the member is denied advancement to the
seventh step, or is faced with reversion to the sixth step, such finding must be
confirmed by three departmental deputy chiefs, sitting as a board of review.

The Chief Administrative Officer of the Department may, in his discretion and
without concurrence of three departmental deputy chiefs, certify that a member's
standard of service is satisfactory, but he may not certify that a member's standard
of service is unsatisfactory without the concurrence of the three departmental deputy
chiefs.

All certifications required by this section shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Controller.

The Chief Administrative Officer of the Police Department shall establish procedures
for rating and reviewing the standards of service required for merit increases. The
procedures shall be approved by the General Manager of the Personnel Department
and the City Administrative Officer. The procedures shall provide as follows:

(1) Rating and reviewing of a member's performance at least annually.

(2) Rating and reviewing of a member's performance at any time the member's
standard of service falls below the minimum standard required for receiving
his present merit step.

(3) Rating by a supervisor at least one rank above the member being rated.

- 164 -
(f

(4) Review by the supervisor of the rater except for the rank immediately below
the Chief Administrative Officer which shall not be subject to review.

(5) Written documentation indicating the member is performing the standards of
service required for a merit step and has sustained the level of performance
for the required period.

All members may normally be expected to achieve the satisfactory standard of
service required for advancement to Step 7.

Effective Dates of Pay Increases or Decreases.

When anniversary dates for step raises, merit, hazard, and special pay, and
longevity fall within a payroll period, the pay increase shall be effective at the
beginning of the payroll period within which the date falls. When hazard, special pay,
merit pay, or assignment pay are decreased within a payroll period, the decrease
shall be effective at the beginning of the following payroll period.

- 165 -
APPENDIX |

Longevity, Assignment, Special and Hazard Pay

The Chief of Police may assign persons in the following described classes and pay grades
to those duties set forth below. Members of the Police Department shall receive an
additional increment of salary while so assigned in the amount set forth hereinafter. Such
additional increment of salary shall be special pay or hazard pay over and above the
compensation attached to the class and pay grade, and shall be paid only while a person is
so assigned.

A. Length of Service Pay

Any member of the Police Department who is employed as a Police Officer,
regardless of pay grade, shall be eligible for longevity pay based upon the aggregate
number of years he or she has served as a member of the department. For the
purpose of computing such aggregate service, any member shall be deemed to
have been in the service of the Police Department during any period of disability
retirement under Charter Sections 1310, 1312, 1412, 1506, or 1606. Such longevity
pay shall be made subject to the following conditions:

1. Upon the certification to the Controller by the Chief of Police that a member
has completed the prescribed number of aggregate years of service as a
member of his or her department and that such member’s standard of service
is satisfactory, such member shall receive compensation in addition to the
regular salary prescribed for his or her class and pay grade to be computed
as follows:

(a) Upon completion of ten and until the completion of 15 years of
aggregate service, an amount equal to one-half step above the
maximum rate fixed in MOU No. 24 for Police Officer II, as calculated
by the City Administrative Officer.

(b) Upon completion of 15 and until completion of 20 years of aggregate
service, an amount equal to one step above the maximum rate fixed in
MOU No. 24 for Police Officer Il, as calculated by the City
Administrative Officer.

(c) Upon completion of 20 years of aggregate service, an amount equal
to one and one-half steps above the maximum rate fixed in MOU No.
24 for Police Officer Il, as calculated by the City Administrative Officer.

2. It is the intent of the Council in enacting this section that longevity pay herein
provided for shall be construed and deemed to be a privilege earned by merit
and not a right, and at any time any member's service is unsatisfactory, the
Chief of Police shall so certify to the Controller and upon such certification the
payment of longevity pay for such member shall thereupon cease until such

- 166 -
time as the Chief of Police again certifies that such member has achieved a
satisfactory standard of service.

3. No member of the Police Department employed in any other class other than
Police Officer shall be eligible to receive longevity pay.

Assignment Pay

Assignment Pay means any additional gross pay which, by reason of assignment to
perform special duties or hazardous duties, in a higher class position, grade, code,
or other title than the lowest thereof within the Plan Member's permanent rank, shall
be provided by ordinance or MOU. Excluded from assignment pay is the Uniform
Field Officers Incentive and the Detective Incentive. Police Officer II is not
considered an advanced pay grade and does not signify tenure with the Los Angeles
Police Department. The following are advanced pay grades pertaining to members
of MOU No. 24, Police Officers, Lieutenant and Below Representation Unit:

(1) Police Officer III (4) Sergeant II
(2) Detective II (5) Lieutenant II
(3) Detective III

Special Pay

Special Pay means any additional gross pay which, by reason of assignment to
perform special duties other than hazardous duties, shall be provided by ordinance
or MOU.

(1) | A Police Officer Ill, when assigned to any of the following positions shall be
compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 4:

Assistant squad leader, crime task force;

Court complaint officer;

Lawsuits and claims investigator;

Senior lead officer;

Traffic follow-up investigator;

Labor relations officer;

Logistics Officer, Emergency Services Division;

Senior security aide;

Compton court liaison officer;

City Council sergeant-at-arms;

"or sempaooD

(2) A Police Officer III, when assigned to any of the following positions shall be
compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 5:

a. Senior logistics officer, Emergency Services Division.

- 167 -
Hazard Pay
Hazard Pay means any additional gross pay which, by reason of assignment to

10)

11)

12)

13)

 

14)

perform helicopter duties, two-wheel motorcycle duties or any other hazardous
duties, shall be provided by ordinance or MOU.

A Police Officer Il when assigned to the duty of riding a two-wheel
motorcycle, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 4.
A Police Sergeant I, when assigned to the duty of riding a two-wheeled
motorcycle, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 8.
A Police Sergeant II, when assigned as the Officer-in-Charge, Commercial
Complaint Section, and required to ride a two-wheel motorcycle, shall be
compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 9.

A Lieutenant Il, when assigned as the Officer-In-Charge, Special
Enforcement Section, Emergency Operations Division, and required to ride a
two-wheel motorcycle, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of
Schedule 11.

A Police Officer Il, when regularly assigned as a Tactical Flight Officer at Air
Support Division, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of
Schedule 7.

A Police Officer III, when assigned as the Chief Tactical Flight Officer at Air
Support Division shall be compensated at the corresponding step of
Schedule 8.

A Police Officer Il, when assigned as a helicopter pilot, shall be compensated
at the corresponding step of Schedule 8.

A Police Officer Ill, when assigned as the chief helicopter pilot, shall be
compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 9.

A Police Sergeant, |, when regularly assigned as helicopter supervisor, and
required to pilot a helicopter, shall be compensated at the corresponding step
of Schedule 9.

A Police Sergeant Il, when regularly assigned as assistant watch
commander, Air Support Division, and required to pilot a helicopter, shall be
compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 10.

A Police Lieutenant |, when assigned as watch commander, Air Support
Division, and required to pilot a helicopter, shall be compensated at the
corresponding step of Schedule 11.

A Police Lieutenant II, when assigned as assistant commanding officer, Air
Support Division, and required to pilot a helicopter, shall be compensated at
the corresponding step of Schedule 12.

Any member, when assigned to the Explosives Section, except as Officer-in-
Charge, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of the third
schedule above the schedule for their class and pay grade.

Any member, when assigned as Officer-in-Charge of the Explosives Section,
shall be compensated at the corresponding step of the second schedule
above the schedule for their class and pay grade.

- 168 -
15) Any member, when assigned to the Illicit Lab Squad, Narcotics Division, shall
be compensated at the corresponding step of the first schedule above the
schedule for their class and pay grade.

16) Any member, when assigned to the Hazardous Materials Unit, Uniformed
Services Division, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of the
third schedule above the schedule for their class and pay grade.

17) A Police Officer III, when assigned to the Special Weapons and Tactics Unit
of Metropolitan Division, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of
Schedule 4.

18) A Police Officer IIl+1, when assigned to the Special Weapons and Tactics
Unit of Metropolitan Division, shall be compensated at the corresponding step
of Schedule 5.

19) A Sergeant Il, when assigned to the Special Weapons and Tactics Unit of
Metropolitan Division, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of
Schedule 8.

20) A Police Officer III, when assigned as a Dog Handler at Narcotics Division,
Metropolitan Division or LAX shall be compensated at the corresponding step
of Schedule 4.

21) A Police Officer Ill, when assigned as a Canine Training Officer at Narcotics
Division or Metropolitan Division shall be compensated at the corresponding
step of Schedule 5.

22) A Detective II, when assigned as a Dog Handler at Narcotics Division, shall
be compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 7.

23) A Sergeant Il, when assigned as a Dog Handler at Narcotics Division or
Metropolitan Division, shall be compensated at the corresponding step of
Schedule 8.

24) A Sergeant Il, when assigned as a Trainer/Supervisor, Canine Unit, LAX,
shall be compensated at the corresponding step of Schedule 8.

Management of the Police Department shall determine whether special pay and
hazard pay shall begin at the time of assignment or upon completion of specific
raining and other requirements related to the positions to which Special or Hazard
Pay applies.

 

Whenever a work program of a department requires the assignment of duties of an
employee, the nature of which qualified him to receive adjusted compensation or
pay, the City Administrative Officer may, upon review of the request by the
appointing authority, and by notification to the Controller, authorize payment of
special or hazard pay in accordance with this Section, provided such assignment is
on a program for a purpose previously authorized by Mayor and Council, and
provided that in no event shall such authorization extend beyond the end of the
fiscal year in which such authority is granted.

- 169 -
APPENDIX J
Time Conversion for Work Hours

The following table shall be used to convert specified time periods from days to hours. All
other provisions of the applicable Articles of this MOU and Charter §1070 remain the same.

Days Hours

Vacation 15 120
16 128
22 176
23 184
24 192
25 200
30 240
32 256
44 352
46 368
48 384
50 400
Sick Leave
100% 12 96
75% 5 40
50% 5 40
Accumulated Sick Leave"
100% 100 800
75% 100 800
50% 100 800
Preventive Med/Dental 3 24 (Includes employee’s family)
Family Illness 12 96
Bereavement Leave? 3
Leave w/Bereav. Lv 2
Military Leave 30 174 (Maximum number of hours per fiscal year)
Injured on Duty 261 2088 (Maximum number of hours per fiscal year)
Suspension® 1 8

' This shows the maximum number of hours that may be accumulated for Sick Leave in each category. Time
‘on the job and use of sick leave by the employee for his or her own illness, family illness and preventative
medical/dental leave determines when an employee may achieve the maximum balance.

? Bereavement Leave is counted in days and is not converted to hours.

° For the purpose of calculating suspensions, each “working day" is equivalent to eight (8) hours.

- 170 -
APPENDIX K

Court Overtime Revisions and Examples
The following scenarios were developed to assist in the interpretation of Article 6.3.

EXAMPLE #1:

An employee is required to appear in court at 0900 hours and is released at 0930 hours
without being placed on call. The employee is entitled to the two-hour (2.0) minimum of
overtime compensation for the court appearance.

Overtime Reports/Activity Code:
One Overtime Report showing hours worked as 0900-0930 and requesting two hours of
overtime compensation. Activity Code 14/87 plus the proper Status Code.

EXAMPLE #2:

An employee is required to appear in court at 0830 hours, is released at 1000 hours and is
required to remain on call until 1600 hours. The employee is entitled to the two-hour (2.0)
minimum of overtime compensation for the court appearance, and the two and one-half
hour (2.5) minimum of overtime compensation for the on-call time.

Overtime Reports/Activity Code:

1. One Overtime Report showing hours worked as 0830-1000 hours and requesting
the two-hour minimum of overtime compensation for the court appearance. Activity
Code 14/87 plus the proper Status Code.

2. A second Overtime Report showing hours worked as 1030-1600 hours (on-call
overtime cannot begin until the two-hour minimum for the court appearance ends)
and requesting the two- and one-half hour minimum of overtime compensation for
on call court. Activity Code 15/88 plus the proper Status Code.

EXAMPLE #3:

An employee is required to appear in court at 1300 hours, is released at 1400 hours and is
required to remain on call until 1600 hours. The employee is entitled to the two-hour (2.0)
minimum of overtime compensation for the court appearance and one-hour (1.0) of
overtime compensation for on-call court. On call cannot begin until the two-hour minimum
for the court appearance ends. On call shall be reported as the actual time on call when it
commences less than two and one-half hours before the end of on call for the court day
(1600 hours).

Overtime Reports/Activity Code:

1. One Overtime Report showing hours worked as 1300-1400 and requesting the two-
hour minimum of overtime compensation for the court appearance. Activity Code
14/87 plus the proper Status Code.

2. A second Overtime Report showing hours worked as 1500-1600 hours and
requesting one hour of overtime compensation for on-call court. Activity Code 15/88
plus the proper Status Code.

-171 -
EXAMPLE #4:

An employee is required to appear in court at 0900 hours, is released at 1000 hours and
placed on call. The employee is subsequently called to return to court at 1300 hours and
court ended at 1600 hours. The employee is entitled to the two-hour (2.0) minimum
overtime compensation for the court appearance, the overtime compensation for the on call
and three hours (3.0) of overtime compensation at the rate of hour-for-hour for the second
court appearance.

Overtime Reports/Activity Code:

1. One Overtime Report showing hours worked 0900-1000 hours and requesting the
minimum of two hours of overtime compensation for the court appearance. Activity
Code 14/87 plus the proper Status Code.

2. A second Overtime Report showing 1100-1300 hours and requesting the two hour
minimum of overtime compensation for being on call (on call cannot begin until after
the two-hour minimum for the court appearance). Activity Code15/88 plus the proper
Status Code.

3. A third Overtime Report showing hours worked as 1300-1600 hours and requesting
three hours for the second court appearance (hour-for-hour for being in court).
Activity Code16/89 plus the proper Status Code.

EXAMPLE #5:

An employee is required to appear in court at 0900 hours, is released at 1400 hours and
placed on call until 1600 hours. The employee is entitled to four and three-tenths hours
(4.3) of overtime compensation for being in court and two hours (2.0) of overtime
compensation for being on call. (An employee is not entitled to overtime pay for the court
noontime recess as specified in Article 6.3.A.1.a.)

Overtime Report/Activity Code:

1. One Overtime Report showing hours worked as 0900-1400 hours (minus 45 minutes
for Code 7) and requesting four and one-fourth hours for the court appearance.
Activity Code 14/87 plus the proper Status Code.

2. A second Overtime Report showing hours worked as 1400-1600 hours and
requesting two hours for being on call. (This shall be reported as the actual time on
call when it commences less than two and one-half hours before the end of the court
day.) Activity Code 15/88 plus the proper Status Code.

EXAMPLE #6:

An employee has two separate subpoenas for be-there court. The employee is required to
appear in court at 0900 hours, is released at 0930 hours by one court and placed on call
until 1600 hours. The employee remains at the second court and is released at 1400 hours
and placed on call until 1600 hours. The employee is entitled to four and three-tenths
hours (4.3) of overtime compensation for appearing in court (the longer of the two court
appearances) and two hours (2.0) of overtime compensation for the actual time of being
on call. (An employee is not entitled to overtime pay for the court noontime recess as
specified in Article 6.3.A.1.a.

- 172 -
Overtime Report/Activity Code:

1. One Overtime Report showing hours worked 0900-1400 hours and four and one-
quarter hours of overtime compensation (minus 45 minutes for the court noontime
recess) for appearing in court. Activity Code 14/87 plus the proper Status Code.

2. A second Overtime Report showing the hours worked 1400-1600 hours for on call.
(This shall be reported as the actual time on call when it commences less than two
and one-half hours before the end of on-call for the court day.) Activity Code 15/88
plus the proper Status Code.

EXAMPLE #7:

An employee receives an on-call subpoena for court for 0830 hours. The employee is
subsequently notified to appear in court at 1030 hours. The employee appears in court at
1030 hours and is released at 1400 hours. The employee is entitled to the two hours (2.0)
compensation for being on call and for two and eight-tenths hours (2.8) overtime
compensation for appearing in court.

Overtime Reports/Activity Code:

1. One Overtime Report showing hours worked as 0830-1030 hours and requesting
the two-hour overtime compensation for being on call. Activity Code 15/88 plus the
proper Status Code.

2. A second Overtime Report showing hours worked as 1030-1400 hours and
requesting two hours of overtime compensation (hour-for-hour minus 45 minutes for
the noontime recess). Activity Code 16/89 plus the proper Status Code.

EXAMPLE #8:

An employee assigned to detectives receives an on-call subpoena for court at 0830 hours
and the employee’s work hours are 0600-1530 hours. The employee is entitled to one-half
hour (0.5) for being on call from the employee’s end of watch to the end of on call at 1600
hours. This shall be reported as the actual time on call when it commences less than two
and one-half hours before the end of the on call court day (1600 hours).

Overtime Report/Activity Code:

One Overtime Report showing hours worked as 1530-1600 hours and requesting one -half
hour of overtime compensation for being on-call. Activity Code 15/88 plus the proper Status
Code.

- 173 -
APPENDIX L
DISPUTE RESOLUTION

The Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC) will be composed of the Employee
Relations Administrator (ERA) or his or her designee, a representative of the City
Administrative Office (CAO), and a representative of the League. It will be the only
remedy available.

Disputes presented to the DRC are limited to issues that are specifically identified in
this agreement or that the parties mutually agree to. This may include issues that
do or do not fall within the guidelines of a grievance. The DRC will be available to
settle issues of a minor nature which sworn personnel of rank of lieutenant or below
elect to pursue via dispute resolution procedures. Grievable issues that may fall
within the purview of the DRC are change of shift, hardship issues and the
assignment of vacations following transfer or reassignment.

Note: Grievances of a minor nature are those not requiring extensive investigation
and/or research. The final determination as to what constitutes a minor nature shall
be decided by the DRC. Grievances that may not be pursued via the DRC include,
but are not limited to, non-selection to an advanced paygrade position, performance
evaluations, harassment and class-action matters.

Any decision of the DRC is binding and any issue presented to, and ruled on by, the
DRC is not otherwise grievable or arbitrable. When the need arises, the DRC will
convene as soon as possible to rule on all disputes that are presented before it.
Proceedings before the DRC shall be informal in order to achieve a speedy
resolution. A majority of the DRC may discontinue this process and, if the DRC is
discontinued, only disputes defined in Article 8 of the MOU may be pursued via the
Grievance Procedure.

-174-
APPENDIX M

FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT PROVISIONS

It is the intent of the parties that the provisions and administration of this Article be in
compliance with the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993; the California Family Rights Act
of 1993; the Pregnancy Disability Leave provisions of the California Fair Employment and
Housing Act; the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act; the
California Military and Veterans Code; and the Fiscal Year 2010 National Defense
Authorization Act (further information on this Act is contained in the Employee Relations
Bulletins issued February 6, 2009, and January 8, 2010, by the Office of the City
Administrative Officer.

A.

Authorization for Leave

Up to four months of family or medical leave shall be provided for the purpose of
childbirth, adoption, foster care of a child, or serious health condition of an
immediate family member (as defined in Article 7.8), upon the request of the
employee, or designation by Management in accordance with applicable federal or
State law, notwithstanding any other provisions of this MOU or the Los Angeles
Administrative Code to the contrary.

Any employee may take leave under the provisions of this Article if the employee
has a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the
functions of the employee’s position.

Leave under the provisions of this Article shall be limited to four months during a
twelve-month period, regardless of the number of incidents. A twelve-month period
shall begin on the first day of leave for each individual taking such leave. The
succeeding twelve-month period will begin the first day of leave taken under the
provisions of this Article after completion of the previous twelve-month period.

Exception: Under the provisions of this Article, a pregnant employee may be
eligible for up to four (4) months (nine [9] pay periods) for childbirth disability and up
to an additional four (4) months (nine [9] pay periods) for purposes of bonding. (See
Sections D.1 and D.6 of this Article.)

Definitions

1. Spouse means a husband or wife as defined or recognized under State law
for purposes of marriage in this State.

2. Domestic partner means a named domestic partner in a confidential
affidavit declaring the existence of said domestic partner and signed by the
City employee, which is on file in the Employee Benefits Office, Personnel
Department.

- 175 -
Parent means a biological, foster or adoptive parent, a stepparent, a legal
guardian or an individual who stands or stood in loco parentis to an employee
when the employee was a child as defined in (d) below. This term does not
include parents “in-law.” Persons who are “in loco parentis” include those
with day-to-day responsibilities to care for or financially support a child or, in
the case of an employee, who had such responsibility for the employee when
the employee was a child. A biological or legal relationship is not necessary.

Child means a biological, adopted, or foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward,
ora child of a person standing in loco parentis, who is either under age 18, or
age 18 or older and “incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical
disability.”

C. Eligibility

1.

The provisions of this Article shall apply to all employees in this
representation unit who have been employed by the City for at least twelve
months and who have worked for at least 1,040 hours during the twelve
months immediately preceding the beginning of the leave.

Exception: In accordance with Pregnancy Disability Leave under the
California Fair Employment Housing Act (FEHA), on the first day of
employment with the City, pregnant employees are eligible for up to four (4)
months (nine [9] pay periods) of leave if disabled due to pregnancy.

Parents (including those who are domestic partners) who both work for the
City may take leave under the provisions of this Article at the same time to
care for a new child by birth or adoption, foster care of a child, or to care fora
sick parent, but the aggregate period of time to which both are entitled is
limited to the time allowed for only one employee. Each employee must notify
the concerned employing department at the time the leave is requested of
the name and department of the second family member who is requesting
leave for the same incident. Such notification must include the starting and
ending dates of the time period for which each employee is requesting leave.

The time limitation for parents or domestic partners does not apply to leave
taken by one employee to care for the other who is seriously ill or to care for
a child with a serious health condition.

D. Conditions

1.

Pregnancy — A leave for pregnant employees shall start at the beginning of
the period of disability that a health care provider certifies as necessary.
Leave for the non-disability portion of childbirth may be taken before or after
delivery.

- 176 -
In accordance with Pregnancy Disability Leave under the California FEHA,
employees who are disabled due to pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical
conditions are eligible for up to four (4) months (nine [9] pay periods) of leave
with medical certification certifying the employee is unable to work due to a
pregnancy-related condition. Pregnancy Disability Leave under the FEHA
may be taken before or after the birth of a child, which shall run concurrently
with pregnancy leave under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act of
1993, and must be concluded within one year of the child’s birth.

Employees (either parent) are also eligible for family leave (“bonding”) under
the California Family Rights Act, which shall be limited to four months (nine
[9] pay periods) and must be concluded within one year of the child’s birth or
adoption. (The administration of such leave shall be in accordance with
Section C.2. of this Article).

Adoption - The start of family leave for adoption or foster care of a child shall
begin on a date reasonably close to the date the child is placed in the
custody of the employee. Leave may also be granted prior to the placement if
an absence from work is required.

Family Illness - The start of a family leave for a serious health condition of a
family member shall begin on the day requested by the employee or, if none
is requested, on a day designated by Management.

Employee’s Own Illness - The start of a leave for the employee’s own
serious health condition shall begin on the date requested by the employee
or, if none is requested, on a day designated by Management. Serious
health conditions occurring during the course and scope of employment
activities shall not apply to this Section.

A serious health condition is defined as an illness, injury, impairment, or
physical or mental condition that involves any period of:

(a) Incapacity or treatment connected with in-patient care in a ho