spital,
hospice or residential medical facility; or

(b) Incapacity requiring an absence of greater than three days involving
continuing treatment by or under the supervision of a health care
provider; or

(c) Incapacity (or treatment resulting therefrom) due to a chronic serious
health condition; or

(d) Incapacity that is permanent or long-term due to a condition for which
treatment may not be effective; or

-177 -
E.

10.

(e) | Absences to receive multiple treatments (including any period of
recovery therefrom) by, or on referral by, a health care provider for a
condition that likely would result in incapacity for more than three
consecutive days if left untreated; or

(f) Incapacity due to pregnancy or for prenatal care.

Continuous/Intermittent Leave - All leave granted under this Article shall
normally be for a continuous period of time for each incident. However, an
employee shall be permitted to take intermittent leave or work on a reduced
schedule to take care of a family member with a serious health condition or
for the employee’s own serious health condition when it is medically
necessary. Management may require the employee to transfer temporarily to
an available alternative position for which the employee is qualified to
accommodate recurring leave periods.

In accordance with the California Family Rights Act (CFRA), leave for the
birth, adoption or foster care placement of a child of an employee (“bonding”
leave) does not have to be taken in one continuous period of time. Under
CFRA, the basic minimum duration of bonding leave is two weeks, and on
any two occasions an employee is entitled to such bonding leave for a time
period of not less than one day but less than two weeks’ duration. Any other
form of intermittent leave, or work on a reduced schedule, for the purpose of
bonding leave shall only be permitted at the discretion of Management.
Bonding leave must be concluded within one year of the birth or placement of
the child.

 

If any employee requires another leave for a separate incident under the
provisions of this Article during the same twelve-month period, a new request
must be submitted.

A personal leave beyond the four-month leave provided in this Article may be
requested, subject to the approval of the appointing authority and, if required,
the Personnel Department, as provided under other City leave provisions.

Management has the right to request that an employee submit certification
from a health care provider to substantiate that the leave is due to the serious
health condition of the employee or the employee’s immediate family
member. Management shall allow employees at least 15 calendar days to
obtain the medical certification.

Absences from work due to an on-duty injury (OD) shall not be designated
as Family Medical Leave under this Article.

Notice Requirements

- 178 -
Employee - When an employee requests family or medical leave, he/she
must state the reason for the requested leave (e.g., childbirth, to care for an
immediate family member with a serious health condition, etc.). When the
necessity for a leave is foreseeable, the employee must provide at least 30
days notice. However, if the leave must begin in less than 30 days, the
employee must provide as much advance notice as is practicable.

Management- In response to an employee’s request for family or medical
leave, Management shall indicate whether or not the employee is eligible for
such leave, if such leave will be counted against the employee’s annual
family or medical leave entitlement, and any requirement for the employee to
furnish medical certification. Management shall also notify an employee in
writing if it designates leave, paid or unpaid, taken by an employee as family
or medical leave-qualifying regardless of whether or not the employee
initiates a request to take family or medical leave.

Applicable Time Off

Employees who are granted leave in accordance with this Article shall take time off
in the following order:

1.

Childbirth (Mother)

(a) Accrued sick leave (100%, 75%, 50%) or vacation for the entire period

of disability that a health care provider certifies is necessary,
including prenatal care or the mother’s inability to work prior to the
birth) may be taken at the employee’s discretion.

(b) For the non-disability portion of childbirth leave (before or after
delivery — “bonding”) accrued vacation time shall be used prior to the
use of time under (c), (d), and (e) below.

(c) Accrued sick leave; all 100% sick leave shall be used first, followed by
he use of all 75% sick leave, followed by the use of all 50% sick
leave. The use of sick leave under this subsection is at the
employee’s discretion.

(d) | Accrued compensatory time off may be used at the employee’s
discretion after exhaustion of 100% sick leave. In accordance with the
final Department of Labor Regulations, which became effective
January 16, 2009, and govern the federal Family and Medical Leave
Act, any use of accrued compensatory time off under this Section
shall be counted against the employee’s annual family and medical
leave entitlement.

 

- 179 -
e)

a)

 

(e)

Unpaid leave.

Childbirth (Father or Domestic Partner), Adoption, Foster Care or
Family Illness

Annual family illness sick leave up to twelve days may be used at the
employee’s discretion. Such leave may be taken before or after the
vacation time off described in (b) below.

Accrued vacation time. Such time must be used prior to the use of
time under (c) and (d) below.

Accrued sick leave; all 100% sick leave shall be used first, followed by
the use of all 75% sick leave, followed by the use of all 50% sick
leave. The use of sick leave under this subsection is at the
employee’s discretion.

Accrued compensatory time off may be used at the employee’s
discretion after exhaustion of 100% sick leave. In accordance with the
final Department of Labor Regulations, which became effective
January 16, 2009, and govern the federal Family and Medical Leave
Act, any use of accrued compensatory time off under this Section
shall be counted against the employee’s annual family and medical
leave entitlement.

Unpaid leave.

Personal Medical Leave

(a)

(b)

(d)

Accrued sick leave (100%, 75%, 50%) may be used at the employee’s
discretion. Such leave may be taken before or after the vacation time
off described in (b) below.

Accrued vacation time. Such time must be used prior to the use of
time under (c) below.

Accrued compensatory time off may be used at the employee’s
discretion after exhaustion of 100% sick leave. In accordance with the
final Department of Labor Regulations, which became effective
January 16, 2009, and govern the federal Family and Medical Leave
Act, any use of accrued compensatory time off under this Section
shall be counted against the employee’s annual family and medical
leave entitlement.

Unpaid leave

- 180 -
Sick Leave Rate of Pay During Family Leave

Payment for sick leave usage under Section F.1., 2., and 3. shall be at the regular
accrued rate of 100%, 75%, or 50%, as appropriate.

Monitoring
Management shall maintain such records as are required to monitor the usage of

leave as defined in this Article. Such records are to be made available to the League
upon request.

- 181 -
APPENDIX N
CODE 7

Assigned shifts may be extended by order of the Chief of Police for an additional period
(Code 7 or free time) not to exceed 45 minutes for entities having an established roll call
and training period, or 30 minutes for entities that do not have an established roll call and
training period.

If the Chief of Police exercises the option to extend a work shift by up to 45 minutes,
overtime shall not include and no compensation shall be granted for the additional period of
45 minutes or less (meal period) unless such period is interrupted or missed because an
employee is required to and does respond to a police emergency or the employee does not
have an opportunity to take the free time. In order to receive “no Code 7” overtime or a
portion thereof, employees must have notified the watch commander of his/her inability to
take free time or Code 7 more than one hour prior to the end of shift and received approval
for such overtime. Supervisors are obligated to make every effort to afford employees an
opportunity to take Code 7.

- 182 -
LETTER OF INTENT
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING NO. 24
POLICE OFFICERS, LIEUTENANT AND BELOW
REPRESENTATION UNIT - 2011-2014

The parties agree to the following in conjunction with the 2011-14 MOU:

e The parties agree to meet to discuss the parking situation at the Criminal Courts
Building in downtown Los Angeles.

e The parties agree to explore the use of Alternative Dispute Resolution in the area of
Workers Compensation.

e The parties agree to work cooperatively and discuss options to continue to provide
quality, affordable healthcare to members of the bargaining unit.

e The parties agree to explore the League’s assumption of responsibilities to
represent employees during Administrative Appeals and Categorical Use of Force
investigations.

e The City agrees to consider restructuring the existing salary schedule for entry-level
Police Officers.

e The City agrees to research whether the $1,500 payable to Unit members in
December 2011 for the purchase of firearms and equipment may be directed to an
individual employee’s Deferred Compensation account.

e The parties agree to meet to discuss procedural changes to Article 3.5 — Substance
Testing.

e The Department agrees to meet and confer regarding involuntary watch
reassignments in an effort to make the policy consistent with FWS.

e The City agrees to consider requests for additional compensation for Unit members
in specialized assignments. These specialized assignments will be specifically
identified by the League and communicated to the City Administrative Officer by
August 31, 2011.

- 183 -
