OFFICERS
Cc SK

fhe ee
eet SS
PHLICE SFFreLy) a

i 4

(Seas Chae
Za aw 4 i
z es

AGREEMENT BETWEEN
‘THE CITY OF CORPUS CHRIST!

AND

THE CORPUS CHRISTI POLICE OFFICERS’
ASSOCIATION

August 1, 2015 to September 30, 2019

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Article 1 - Preamble ..............ccccccscsssssssssesssssssscsssessessecsscsresnscnssssessassseasessseeseesneesseeseesseenee 6
Article 2 - Defimitions..............ccccssssssscsecssssssssesssessecsesncsecsoteerscatssacseseauessussseeseessessaseasenee 6
Article 3 - Association Rights ...0........ccccccceccscceessessesesseesessessesscsscsessessssnesessessesaessessessesee 8
A. Association Recognition and Scope of Unit ..........cscccsssssessssssestesseessesseesseesessees 8
B. Payroll Deduction Of Dues 0... eessssssssssssssessessssesscssessessessssssseseeestssssessrsstesecsonte 8
C. Time Off for Association Business .......0......csscessesseseeseeseesetsctsssessnsenssaneaneesseares 9
D. Bulletin Boards .........cccsssssssssssssessssessssecnecssessssecsuvecsnecsseccenesseneeseueessnecessersneessete It
Article 4 - Association Duties ..............s.scscssessssesssrersseccssessntecnseessuerseceesurecueensnecesneceatecsanees 12
Article 5 - Management Rights 0.00... .ccessesessessseessscscesessneccseconeceseenssscesaeesseesesseeeseess 13
Article 6 - Management Duties to the Association ....0............cccssessseseescesssesssesseeseesenes 15
Article 7 — Disciplinary Action...........-.:cccscccssssessesesssesssssnsstesseestccneeerccnessnesneenieessensessnes 15
Article 8 - Grievance Procedure .............ccccccssssssssceserssseessessrecessseasscsecsneessesessarenseesnesseeseee 22
Article 9 - Hours of Work .0.......0.c cc sccsssesssesstsssessecerecseesscssesscesssesseseesaessscsnseseecseccecensenses 25

 

D. Deferred Compensation for Overtime

 

Article 10 - Salary and Bemefits 0.0.0.0... cccsscssssssssssescesscsscssesessssaceseeseseesesseeseceesscsscsseneese 27

A. Monthly Salary Schedule

 

B. Health Care Plan and Life Premiums.........c.cseccssessssosessseesseesseecsseessessssessseees 29

C. Field Training Officer Pay

 

D. Educational Incentive Pay....s.ssessessssessucsssseesssesssscssesssneesseesssesssnssasecssseesssese 36
. Clothing and Equipment...

 

 

 

 

IE Sae CISION reereretreareceecererreneneereerreernenessstesreeetteetestneetnetat aaa 37
G. Deferred Compensation Plan..
H. Classification Compensated Under the City’s Classification

and Compensation Plan............0..ccceccecccceaeeceeeeeeceseeeeseneeeaeeaaeeaeeesssea 38
L. Termination Pay........ccccescsssesssessessssssssscsssecsccsvsaneccnesersovseaeessssuessnessessecsseeseneess 38
J. Longevity Pay... esscssssssessssecsrecsseesssesssneessassssnssesssnensoneesecneesaes staneneeneee 38
K. Bomb Squad Pay.....sscscssessssesssccsvsecssecssessnsessereensessneensareenesesnessanecsnnecsassesneessaes 38
L. Breathalyzer Certification Pay.......cccccsessssssesessessesesseesserseetsneesessesesssareneeneeee 39
M. Weekend Pay .......cssccsesssessesssessscssessuessesssssusssneanecsvessvessecersosessnssaeeceesansaneeseesneenes 39
N.. Shift Differential Pay 0.0... ..ccccsssssssesssssssessecsscsssssecscenecseeescsssensessseeneessesseees 39
O. Shift Changes .........sssscssessssessssessscsssvssssecsnnessnecseesenressuecensessneesssesssuesssnessseeesasee 39
P. Dog Handler Pay......cssssessssessssecsessssesssersontecsstecsecessesensneesuersaensurecnusessneeeneeesnees 39
Q. SWAT Team Pay ......sseescessessessessessseccnscnscsseesarecsessseneessesarsaseeensenesnnessnesseeaeenvess 39
R. Hostage Negotiation Team Pay
S. Dive Team.......ecccssscssssssesscssccssssssestssssssssssssssessssessssseveesecesecosesscceseneseasesesaneste 39
i
UL Patrol Pay........esceeceecessssesecenceessessrreeeeeeseeersesenianaseeteeeeseneeeenneees 39

 

A. Holidays ......sescsescsecsescssessescnscsssssesssssssasessscssessnscasensseseesneessesuesueesatecnesaeesseaneeaees #! 40

B, Vacations...

 

Cy Personal Leave .....ceccsccsssssssessssssesseccsssssecssecvecssessecsnescacssessnecseesetssessessseesseereeraees 4l

D

. Military Leave...

 

E, Special Leave......sscsssessssessesscesesssecssesssneessseesnecssueecnsesseessuecsuessnscesssecsneessneersses Al
74

. Line of Duty Injury or Illness.

 

G. Administrative Leave .......eeesseccssssssessseessssnsesetscesssessacsssssessanennesssessessneesees 42
H. Leave Buy Back ........ccscsecsseessssssstsssesevesseessnecersosessesorsossssesaceesesessasesnsensesneenses 43
[Sick Leave POOL .....cssssssesssesssrecsescsscssstecssneesssnccneessnerseessnscssasessusssnecseneessseessee 43
J, Other Leave Time Policies .........cscssssssssessseesesssescseessseesnsecnescsuccsaseenueessncsaneesssees 45
K, Bereavement Leave.........cesssessessecsesssessesssessssessscsnssssessesssessnessesssecsssaveesuceneereeees 45
L. Funeral Benefit..........ccccesccssssssesssessesssecsssssssessvscsceavssvestecssessesesagassessessesssesisaneess 45
Article 12 - Personnel] Practices ............csccscsccssssssssssseenessessseeseeerecaessetsetesaesuessaeeaeenseesse 45

A. Interchangeable Use of Police Officers and Senior Police Officers...

 

 

B. Disability ........cessescsssessssessesessvccsvosssvenssessonmessuvesassesseessssersnteenaeecnsersuessneesseeesses 46
C. Civil Service Internal Investigations... cecsesssessescseesessscessecseesnecneessseaseeneees 46
D. Civil Service Commission Records 00... cccscssssesesssecssesseosersesseessecsessssanecavens 47
E. Notice of Shift Change... .cccscsesseeeseesonscsseesescsecsnessessssessessecsneeresseeenecseversees 47
F. Wearing of Uniform on Off Duty Security Jobs... secssesesneecsstersesssnnecsseesnee 48
G. Entrance Examinations ...........ssecssssessesccsesserecssnsessseesnecssueesscesnseessuesseenneecssseenee 48
H. Alternate Hiring Process 0.0... cssessseesssessssssscsessessncsssecssccnessessessesssasssnssaseeneese 48
I. Reinstatement ..

J. Mandatory Random Drug Testing ...........cscccssssssessesseessessecsesenessessecssecsseesseseees 50
K. Layoffs, Recalls and Reduction in Force .........scesssssscessseesecseesssesseenscessesetesesesans 52
L. Temporary Duties in a Higher Classification..........cc:ccececeseseeesseteeeeeeee 52
M. Physical Fitness.............0cccscsescsscesecenseneeceesesensesnenanaeeceeeeeeeeeeeeaes 52

Article 13 - Promotions.

 

A. Posting and Administration of Promotional Examinations.........:..scssssessesseees 52

B. Promotional Examination Corrections..........esssessecsesessseecesesesseessessesssteneennnesses 53
C. Senior Police Officer’s Proficiency Examination

 

D. After Acquired Educational Requirement For Lieutenants
Promoted to Captain.

 

E. Appointment of Assistant Chiefs and Commanders............ccccccescseescesseeneessees 353
F. Probationary Period for Lieutenants and Captains ...........ssssessescssesseesseesessereesees 54
G. Filling Vacancies Below Commander ...........cccccesssssesseecsessecssesecsseessesssecseesseees 54
H. Eligibility for Promotion.....ccc..cssssscssseeccsssssssssuesesseneesessseecssusesesaesesessnessneeessees 35

I. Promotional Procedures..

 

J. Eligibility Lists... 2.00... ceeceeeeeececce eee e eee eeecease nassau eneeseseseeseeeeeeenen 37

K. Grievance or Suits Claiming a Right to Promotion................cesecsseeeeeeeeeens 57

 

L. Chapter 143 Applicability.

M. Nepotism.

 

N. Final Score...

O. Time Served as an Acting or Temp Lieutenant or Captain Between
12/1/06 and 12/10/10...

 

Article 14 - Employee-Management Relations.................scsccssssscsessesseessseseseseenseeneseeseene 58

A. Labor Relations Committee .

 

B. Legal Defense..........ssescsssessssesssssessssessusesssesssecssnsesssscessressnesssssenuesssssesssessseeesseeenes 59
Article 15 - Impasse Procedures. ...........sssssesscsescsseeesseeestesesnessosenseseseneeneecsucsscssaneessaeesse 60

Article 16 - Political Activities .

 

Article 17 - Existing Comditions .............escsssessseesneressenecesseesecnsessccntcacesaneanecnenseensecees 61
Article 18 - Closing Clauses ............0..c:sscssessssssesscsssesssessessseessuesscsnsesuecavenecneansconeesseeseeees 62

Appendix "A" - Dues Deduction and Special Assessment Form

 

Appendix “B” - Termination of Dues Deduction ...........cccccsesssesceessesssestenesssseecessatensessnseee 65

Appendix “C” - Grievance Form...

 
THE STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OFNUECES §
AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 1 - PREAMBLE

Pursuant to the mutual agreement of the parties, this agreement has been entered into by
the City of Corpus Christi, hereinafter referred to as the “City”; and the Corpus Christi Police
Officers' Association, hereafter referred to as the “Association.” The purpose of this agreement is
the promotion of harmonious relations between the City and the Association; the establishment
of equitable and peaceful procedures for the resolution of differences; and the establishment of
compensation and other conditions of employment.

ARTICLE 2 - DEFINITIONS

“Accredited college or university,” means a college or university whose accreditation is
approved by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.

“Association” means the Corpus Christi Police Officers’ Association.

“Calendar days” means any day including weekends and holidays. When the agreement specifies
three hundred and sixty-five (365) days, three hundred and sixty-six (366) days will be used
during a Leap Year.

“C.A.P.F.U.D.T.P.” College of American Pathologist Forensic, Urine, Drug Testing Program.

“Chapter 143, Local Government Code,” means the Municipal Civil Service Act, formerly TEX.
REV.CIV. STAT. ANN. Art. 1269m (codified 1987).

“Chapter 174, Local Government Code,” means the “Fire and Police Employee Relations Act,”
formerly Article 5154c-1 of Vernon’s Annotated Civil Statutes.

“Chief” means the Chief of Police of the City of Corpus Christi.
“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Corpus Christi.
“City” means the City of Corpus Christi.

“Commission” means the Firefighters’ and Police Officers' Civil Service Commission of the City
of Corpus Christi as set forth in Chapter 143, Local Government Code.
“Emergency” is defined as any unexpected happening or event or unforeseen situation or crisis
that calls for immediate action and requires alteration of schedules, work hours, shifts and/or
personnel assignments. The Chief may declare an emergency pursuant to this definition.

“Employee” means any sworn police officer of the City with the exception of the Chief of
Police.

“Executive Board” mean those members of the Association duly elected or selected as officers
and directors of that organization.

“Gender” Reference to the male gender throughout this Agreement shall have equal force and
include reference to the female gender.

“Governmental Accounting Standards Board” (“GASB”) Statement 45-Addresses how “Other
Post Employment Benefits” (“OPEB”) other than pensions are recorded in financial statements.

“Grievance” means any and all disputes arising under the Grievance Procedure in Article 8.

“Member” means any employee who is on the membership list of and pays dues to the
Association.

“MRO.” Medical Review Officer.

“Police Officer Trainee.” An individual employed by the Corpus Christi Police Department who
has not yet completed the Corpus Christi Police Academy and been commissioned as a Police
Officer.

“Probationary Period.” Begins on the date of graduation and commissioning from the Corpus
Christi Police Academy, and ends three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar days from that
date.

“S.A.M.H.S.A.” Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.

“Seniority.” Begins on the date of graduation and commissioning as a Police Officer from the
Corpus Christi Police Academy.

“Strike” means, whether done in concert or individually, a failure to report for duty, the willful
absence from one's position, the stoppage of work, or the abstinence in whole or in part from the
full, faithful, and proper performance of the duties of employment (including but not limited to
"slowdowns", "sickouts", and the intentional failure to make arrests), for the purpose of inducing,
influencing or coercing a change in the conditions, compensation, rights, privileges, or
obligations of employment.

“Supervisor” means any officer with the rank of Lieutenant or above, or any officer, when
assigned supervisory duties by ranking officers having authority to make such assignments.

[Page 7
“TCOLE” means the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement, formerly known “TCLEOSE”
(Texas Commission of Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education).

“Termination of employment” means the officer voluntarily resigned, whether eligible for
retirement or not, or was indefinitely suspended and did not appeal his or her termination of
employment or after exhaustion of all appeals to arbitration and/or court.

“Work hour or working hour” means any hour an employce is scheduled to be on duty regardless
of whether on a weekend or holiday.

“Work days or working day” means business days excluding weekends and holidays.
ARTICLE 3 - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS

A. Association Recognition and Scope of Unit. The City hereby recognizes the Association
as the sole and exclusive collective bargaining agent for the unit consisting of all Police Officers,
Senior Police Officers, Lieutenants, Captains, Commanders, and Assistant Chiefs.

B. Payroll Deduction of Dues.

1. The Association shall supply the City with all necessary papers and information for
payroll deduction of Association dues and assessments. The City shall not authorize payroll
deductions for membership dues to any other employee organization, which is qualified to be a
collective bargaining agent for police officers.

2. The City agrees to deduct dues upon receipt from the Association of a “Dues
Deduction” form voluntarily and individually authorized, signed and dated by each member of
the Association. Such dues will be established by the Executive Board in accordance with the
bylaws of the Association. This authorization shall remain in full force and effect for the term of
this agreement or until termination by the employee. Such “Dues Deduction” form is found in
Appendix “A” and is incorporated by reference into this agreement. The City shall begin such
deductions on the following pay period after receipt of the “Dues Deduction” form. Any dues
increase will require the vote of the Executive Board and shall not need additional signatures
from the general membership.

3. The City agrees to deduct special assessments from all employees that are members
of the Association upon receipt of official notification from the President of the Association
indicating that said special assessment has been approved and ratified by a majority vote of the
Association members. In return, the Association agrees to defray the administrative costs to the
City for such assessments in the amount of $50.00 per month to be invoiced by the City on a
monthly basis during the period of special assessment. The City is not responsible for the
administration and procedures used by the Association in collecting, distributing or return of any
assessment monies. The following language is for clarification only and is not subject to the
grievance procedure: The assessment ballot shall state the type of assessment, the amount of the
assessment, the designated period of the assessment, and date and manner of the reimbursement,
if any. The reimbursement of all unused assessment funds shall be distributed equally within
thirty (30) calendar days of termination of the project as defined in the assessment ballot. For
example, “the members shall be assessed $10.00 for collective bargaining negotiations and
reimbursement of all unused assessment funds shall be distributed equally within thirty (30)
calendar days of execution of a new agreement.”

4. At any time a member of the Association desires to withdraw his/her membership, he
may voluntarily and individually do so. Such action will be initiated through a “Termination of
Dues Deduction” form in Appendix “B” voluntarily and individually signed by the member of
the Association and a list of the names of officers who have terminated their participation shall
be sent to the Association. The Association, pursuant to its constitution and by-laws, may
suspend a member temporarily or permanently. Such action will be initiated through a
“Termination of Dues Deduction” form signed by the president of the Association and furnished
to the City. Such “Termination of Dues Deduction” form is found in Appendix “B” and is
incorporated by reference into this agreement. The City shall terminate deduction of dues on the
following pay period after receipt of the “Termination of Dues Deduction” form.

5. The City will be obligated to remit to the Association only those sums deducted as
dues and assessments from the Association member's paycheck and will not be liable for
damages to the Association, any individual employee, or other persons for failure to deduct any
authorized sum for any reason.

6. The City shall continue its practice of providing the Association with the print-out of
current dues deductions.

7. The City shall provide to the Association on or about January 31 of each year, a
written copy of the CCPD General Rules Manual and all Divisional Manuals. The City will
further provide in a timely manner electronic updates to said manuals, The City shall provide a
written or electronic copy of the CCPD/Municipal Court Telephone Directory as updated, within
a reasonable time period. The Association agrees to use the directory for only internal
Association activities and agrees to hold the City harmless.

C. Time Off for Association Business.

1. Subject to prior notification to the Chief or the next highest ranking officer, the
Executive Board, or its designees, shall have the right to visit the premises of the Police
Department for purposes of administering this agreement. For a period of time not to exceed four
(4) hours, the Association shall have the exclusive right to make a presentation to cadets at each
academy class on the benefits provided by the association, the benefits and rights under the
collective bargaining contract, and the rights of police officers under state and federal law. The
visits and presentations shall be conducted in a manner and at a time as not to interfere with the
functions of the department and approved by the Chief. Such approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld.

2. Once a calendar year, each member of the Association shall contribute accumulated
sick leave hours to a pool to be known as the “Association Business Leave Pool” in an amount
determined by the City and Association to be sufficient to fund the Association President’s
annual base salary and the number of days of an Association 1" Vice President’s base salary
specified below. This pool shall be used to compensate the Association President and
Association 1" Vice President in accordance with this paragraph. During his/her entire term of
office, the Association President shall be relieved of duty with pay to perform Association duties.
With prior approval the Chief of Police after a written request by the Association President, the
Association 1" Vice President shall be relieved of duty for up to one hundred and eighty (180)
days. The Association President's base salary shall be offset by the hours in such pool. The
Association 1° Vice President’s base salary shall be offset by the hours in such pool, as
described above. A five (5) day, eight (8) hour per day work schedule will be used to calculate
the 1° Vice President’s time on leave. The City shall continue to pay all benefits and additional
pay which they are entitled while the Association President and/or 1° Vice President are on
Association business leave. The period during which the Association President and/or
Association 1* Vice President is relieved of duty under this provision shall not constitute a break
in service. In the event of an emergency, the Chief may order the Association President and/or 1“
Vice President, while on Association business leave, to report for duty as assigned by the Chief
during the emergency situation.

In the event of the incapacity of the Association President for a period in excess of two
(2) weeks for illness or injury, at the option of the President, the President may elect to
discontinue use of the pool and utilize sick leave. This shall be effective upon two (2) weeks
written notification in advance that the Association 1st Vice President shall be assuming the
duties of the President. The Association 1“ Vice President upon assuming the duties of the
President shall be eligible to use the pool hours during the absence of the President. In no event
shall more than two (2) Association officers be eligible to draw pool hours from the pool at the
same time due to the incapacity of the Association President. In the event of the death of the
Association President or incapacity during which the Association President is unable to
communicate, the Association Ist Vice President shall provide written notice of the intent to
utilize the pool hours under this provision.

The Association President or 1" Vice President while relieved of duty to perform
Association duties shall not be placed on limited duty.

3. With five (5) calendar days written notice to the Chief of Police, time off with pay
will be allowed for officers who participate on the Association's negotiating team on days that
the team is preparing for negotiations and while contract negotiations are in session. If the team
member is on their regular day off, the employee is entitled to another day off with pay. The total
number of persons participating on each of the negotiating teams shall be equal, but no less than
three (3). Preparation time shall be limited to that reasonably necessary not to exceed one (1)
workday for each scheduled day of bargaining.

4. Members of the Executive Board may receive time off, without loss of pay, to attend
regularly scheduled Association meetings, and Executive Board meetings. The Chief may, at
his/her discretion, grant said time off, subject to scheduling and manpower contingencies that
may arise.

[Page 10
5. Effective upon adoption of this Agreement a pool of four hundred (400) hours shall
be available during each year of this contract for time off with pay for Association delegates to
attend national and state labor board meetings, conferences and conventions, law enforcement
and labor-related training programs and seminars, TMRS training programs or TMRS meetings,
provided that said time off with pay shall not exceed a total of four hundred (400) hours each
contract year regardless of the number of delegates elected to attend such functions. In no event
shall pool hours be used for political fundraising or campaigning. Additional expenses for travel,
lodging, etc. are not included. The Association President shall approve in writing the use of pool
time, and provide an accounting to a designee of the Chief of Police.

6. Except for a person who holds the position of President of the Association and has
elected to be relieved of duty to perform Association duties, no Captain shall be serve as
representative for an employee on a grievance, serve on the Association Grievance Committee,
or serve on the Association negotiating team.

D. Bulletin Boards. The Association may provide and maintain a bulletin board on any
premise of the Police Department at its own expense. The City will not authorize the posting of
bulletin boards on any premise of the Police Department by any other employee organization,
which is qualified to be a collective bargaining agent for police officers. The bulletin board shall
be consistent in design and standards to other bulletin boards in the Police Station for posting of
routine announcements of meetings, Association business, recreational functions, legislative
enactments and judicial decisions. The use of the bulletin board for the postings of partisan
political material, editorial comments and viewpoints of employees in any manner, which would
be in opposition to existing police working conditions, shall not be allowed. Any material on the
bulletin board which the City alleges to be in violation of this agreement shall be promptly
removed by the Association. The matter will then be immediately referred to Step “4” of the
grievance procedure for resolution. The Association shall be allowed to disseminate bulletin
board information under the same rules and regulations adopted for bulletin boards and in
accordance with the procedures spelled out below. The Association President or his/her designee
shall submit the proposed email in writing to the Chief for distribution to members of the
bargaining unit only. The Chief shall approve or disapprove of the proposed email within five (5)
calendar days of receipt from the Association. The Chief shall notify the Association of his/her
decision in writing. In the event the Chief denies the request, the Association shall have five (5)
calendar days from receipt of the Chief’s decision to appeal that decision to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall either affirm or overrule the decision of the Chief within five (5)
calendar days of receipt of an appeal from the Association. The determination of the City
Manager shall be final and binding on the parties and shall not be subject to appeal to a
grievance, arbitration or any other body. It is the intention of this provision to allow the
Association to provide information to officers only. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit
or sanction two-way communication between officers and the Association using this method.
Unauthorized use of the email system in response to Association emails sent under this provision
shall be subject to departmental policy.
ARTICLE 4 - ASSOCIATION DUTIES

A. Prohibited Practices. Neither the Association nor any employee shall engage in any of
the following practices:

1. Restrain or coerce any employee in the exercise of any rights granted under this
agreement;

2. Cause or attempt to cause an employee to discriminate against another employee
because of the employee's membership or non-membership in any employee organization, or
attempt to cause the City to violate any rights of the employee;

3. Discriminate against any employee because he has signed or filed an affidavit,
petition or complaint, or given any information or testimony alleging violation of this agreement;

4. Discriminate against any employee covered by this agreement because of race, sex,
creed, color, age, national origin, affiliation, association or non-association; or discriminate in
the application or interpretation of the provisions of this agreement;

5. Discriminate against any employee who has filed a grievance pursuant to Article 8 of
this agreement;

6. Initiate, authorize, aid, or participate in any strike, picketing, or distribution relating
to the employee's employment or the employment of any other person by the City or any other
employee; or refuse to cross any picket line by whomever established where such refusal would
interfere with or impede the performance of the employee's duties as an employee of the City.

B. The parties hereto agreed that all negotiations will be conducted exclusively between the
designated bargaining representatives of the City and the Association. Neither party will make
any effort to bypass the spokesman of the other party during the period of negotiations for
amendments to this agreement unless an impasse exists as defined under the “Fire and Police
Employee Relations Act,” Chapter 174, Local Government Code.

C. Any changes in wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment and other benefits
granted by the Texas State Legislature requiring the City to compensate, remunerate or otherwise
assist employees after the effective date of this agreement shall not alter the terms of this
agreement during the life of said agreement. This provision shall not unfavorably affect
employees as to any changes in wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment and other
benefits granted by the Texas State Legislature requiring the State of Texas to compensate,
remunerate or otherwise assist employees after the effective date of this agreement. Any changes
in wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment and other benefits granted by the Texas
State Legislature requiring the State of Texas to compensate, remunerate or otherwise assist
employees shall not be incorporated into this agreement; nor shall the City be required at any
time to pay any share of said wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment of other
benefits. Any reduction or elimination of wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment, and
other benefits by the Texas State Legislature that previously required the City to compensate,

Page 12
remunerate or otherwise assist employces after the effective date of this agreement shall not alter
the terms of this agreement during the life of said agreement.

ARTICLE 5 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

A. The Association recognizes that the City has statutory and Charter rights and obligations
in contracting for matters relating to municipal operations. The right of contracting or
subcontracting is vested in the City.

B. The City shall have the authority to consolidate the operations of two (2) or more
departments, and to reorganize the operations within the department, or departments, and the
tight to lay off employees of the department.

C. The City shall have exclusive authority to transfer any governmental operations now
conducted by it to another unit of government. Upon such transfer, all agreements are
terminated, including this agreement as pertaining to personnel of the department affected by the
transfer.

D. The City and the Chief shall retain all rights and authority to which, by law, they are
entitled.

E. It is understood by the parties that every duty connected with operations enumerated in
job descriptions is not always specifically described, and it is intended that all such duties shall
be performed by the employee.

F. The City shall reserve the right to use security personnel which include, but are not
limited to, such job classifications incorporated within the Compensation and Classification Plan
as Safety Security Officer, Jailer, Lifeguard, School Crossing Guard, and Maintenance Security
which require training in law enforcement, safety and security duties, fire fighting skills,
emergency medical treatment, water safety, and other similar related skills. Such job
classification, as well as similar job classifications adopted in the future which would include
public safety personnel for Padre Island, are not subject to the terms of this agreement.

G. Notwithstanding any provision in this agreement to the contrary, and without altering
any other provision of this Agreement, the City is authorized to civilianize the following
positions or units:

1. Departmental Accreditation Manager
2. Fleet Management

3. Narcotics/Vice Investigation Booking Desk

4. Crossing Guard Coordinator

[Page B
5. Police Athletic League (PAL) Coordinator

6. Crime Stoppers

7. Public Information Office

8. Enhanced Digital Access Communications Systems (EDACS)

The City reserves the right to use civilians in the Police Department to perform duties that do
not require a commissioned officer. Duties that require a commissioned officer are defined to be
those duties required by State law to be performed by peace officers. It is specifically agreed that
the City may use civilians to perform duties in the Police Department that are presently being
performed by civilians irrespective of any requirements of state law concerning the requirement
for a police officer. It is also agreed that civilians in the Police Department may not be used as
direct supervisors of any commissioned officer. Interpretation of this provision is subject to
declaratory judgment action.

It is expressly understood and agreed that all provisions of this section shall preempt any
statute, local ordinance, City policy, or rule, which is in conflict with or is inconsistent with this
Agreement and the procedures developed hereunder, including for example and not by way of
limitation, any contrary provisions of Chapters 141, 142, and 143 of the Texas Local
Government Code.

H. The City reserves the right to use personnel from the Police Department and the Fire
Department interchangeably during natural disasters and civil disorders.

I. The Chief shall have the exclusive right to:
1. Establish departmental rules and procedures;
2. Discipline or discharge for cause;
3. Determine work and overtime schedules in a manner most advantageous to the City;
4. Establish methods and processes by which work is performed; and

5. Transfer employees within the department in a manner most advantageous to the
City.

J. Except as provided in this agreement, the City retains the right to operate and manage its
affairs in all respects.
ARTICLE 6 -MANAGEMENT DUTIES TO THE ASSOCIATION

A. The City shall provide the following materials to every employee and the Association in
writing or electronically:

1. A current copy of rules and regulations of the department and any amendments, and
2. A true and correct copy of this agreement.

3. A true and correct copy of the Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Commission
for Firefighters and Police Officers for the City of Corpus Christi, Texas, as amended.

B. The City shall not engage in the following practices:

1. Interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of rights granted in this
agreement;

2. Dominate, interfere, or assist in the formation, existence or administration of any
employee organization which is qualified to be a collective bargaining agent for police officers;
or contribute financial support to any such organization.

3. Encourage or discourage membership in any employee organization by discrimination
in hiring, tenure, training, or other terms or conditions of employment;

4, Discharge or discriminate against any employee because he has filed any affidavit,
grievance, or complaint; or given any information or testimony alleging violations of this
agreement; or because he has formed, joined, or chosen to be represented by any organization;

5. Discriminate against any employee or employee group because of religion, sex, creed,
color, age, national origin, association or non-association or affiliation in an organized employee
group or discriminate in the application or interpretation of the provisions of this agreement.

C. Hurricane Call Out. The City agrees to provide posted locations prior to a call out for a
hurricane where employees may park their privately owned vehicles, and notify the officers of
the employee shelter. The City does not guarantee that vehicles will not be damaged at such
locations or the safety of any person who remains at the employee shelter during the hurricane.

D. The City shall notify the Association in writing of all posted meetings and hearings of the
Civil Service Commission for Firefighters and Police Officers for the City of Corpus Christi,
Texas.

ARTICLE 7 - DISCIPLINARY ACTION
A. The Chief shall have authority to demote, temporarily suspend not to exceed two hundred

and forty (240) work hours, or terminate any employee for the causes set forth in the Rules and
Regulations of the Civil Service Commission for Firefighters and Police Officers of the City. In
the alternative, the Chief shall have authority to impose “alternate disciplinary actions” in the
nature of required attendance at and participation in remedial, educational or rehabilitative
programs. Such programs may be provided by the City or by the City through a third party. The
employee may appeal such actions as provided herein. Nothing herein shall be construed to
allow appeals of reprimands or other disciplinary actions or alleged disciplinary actions, which
were not previously appealable. It shall be within the sole discretion of the Chief to decide
whether to utilize the “alternate disciplinary actions" provided for herein, subject to the appeal
provided herein. When the Chief chooses to demote, temporarily suspend, or terminate any
employee, the arbitrator shall have no authority to consider or substitute an “alternate
disciplinary action.”

B. Disciplinary Statutes of Limitations. The parties will defer to Article 143, Texas Local
Government Code, Section 143.052(h) and Section 143.056 for the statute of limitation on
disciplinary actions.

C, Investigation Guidelines. “Internal Affairs Investigation” means cases where an allegation
of misconduct has been made, a complaint has been generated, assigned for follow up
investigation; it does not include incidents or situations arising in the field which require initial
fact finding to prepare a complaint. In the event that a police officer is interviewed by a division
commander, captain, or internal investigator regarding an internal affairs investigation, which, if
proven, may result in a suspension or indefinite suspension, the following guidelines shall
prevail. This provision shall not apply to officer witnesses who shall be advised of their role in
the investigation.

1. The interview of any employee shall be at a reasonable hour, preferably during on-
duty hours, if possible, but not necessarily, depending upon circumstances. In the event of a
dispute of the reasonable hour determination, the decision of the Chief shall be final.

2. The interview shall take place at a location designated by the investigating officer.

3. The employees shall be informed of the rank, name and command of the officer in
charge of the investigation, as well as the rank, name and command of the interviewing officer
and the identity of all persons present during the interview.

4. When the officer receives the written notice to appear at Internal Affairs for an
interview, the officer shall also receive a copy of the complaint against such officer. The
complaint shall include the name of the complainant, the date of the alleged incident and the
allegations of the officer’s misconduct. Except in exigent circumstances, the employee shall be
informed forty-eight (48) hours prior to being interviewed or asked to otherwise respond to an
internal affairs investigation. If it is known that the employee being interviewed is a witness
only, he shall be so informed. “Exigent circumstances include necessary cooperation during
incident scene procedures, including securing the scene, controlling the public, preliminary
Tesponses to press inquiries, obtaining witness information, obtaining and processing all physical
evidence from the scene or from the officer.”

|Page 16
5. The interview shall be completed with reasonable dispatch. Reasonable respites shall
be allowed. Time shall be provided also for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls, and rest
periods as are reasonably necessary. Prior to the interview, the Officer shall be allowed to view
any and all digital recordings of an incident involving the Officer, including videos and/or
audios.

6. The employee shall not be subjected to any offensive language, nor shall he be
threatened with transfer, dismissal or other disciplinary punishment. No promise of reward shall
be made as an inducement to answering questions. Nothing herein is to be construed as to
prohibit the investigating officer from informing the employee that his/her conduct can become
the subject of disciplinary action resulting in disciplinary punishment.

7. If an employee is under arrest or is likely to be, that is, if he is a suspect or the target
of a criminal investigation, he shall be accorded all rights pursuant to law to which any citizen
would be entitled.

8. At the request of the employee or the interviewing officer, the complete interview of
the employee shall be recorded (video/audio) or by a stenographer. There will be no "off the
record" questions unless so agreed by both parties. All recesses called during the questioning
shall be noted in the record. The party requesting (video/audio) recording or recording by a
stenographer shall pay all costs of same, unless the parties agree on a cost division between
them.

9. Upon request of the employee or the employee’s attorney, said employee or attorney
shall be given an exact copy of any written statement the employee executed, or if the
questioning is (video/audio) or stenographically recorded, the employee or the attorney shall be
permitted to record or transcribe from the original recording of the officer’s own statement or
interview, upon his/her request, or to purchase a copy of the original recording. The City shall
provide within a reasonable time prior to the rebuttal conference or hearing (“Loudermill”), the
employee or the employee’s attorney a reasonable time to review but not copy verbatim or
photocopy any complaints, affidavits, other written statements, GPS/AVL readouts, video
recordings, audio recordings, and photographs, which have been gathered as part of the
administrative investigation. The officer shall not release the provided information to any person
other than his/her attorney or Association representative.

10. The refusal of an employee to answer questions and submit reports shall be grounds
for disciplinary action. Any answer of the employee may be used as evidence in any disciplinary
action against the employee.

11. The investigator for Internal Affairs in charge of the particular case is required to
inform the officer prior to being questioned, interrogated and/or investigated that he/she may
have one representative, an attorney, Association representative or a personal representative,
present during the employee’s interview, unless the officer in writing voluntarily waives this
right. If an officer is ordered to write a statement, the officer shall be allowed to write the Garrity
Warning on the statement. No supervisor may represent or advise his or her immediate

[Page 17
subordinate during any interviews conducted in an internal investigation. The Association
President may represent or advise an employee during an internal investigation.

12. The Chief of Police recognizes the right of Association members to seek advice or
representation by designated Association representatives, and to confer with such designated
Association representatives and legal counsel. Such communications to an Association
representative are privileged and shall not be the subject of compelled disclosure unless
exceptions to the attorney client privilege would apply, had the communication taken place with
counsel. Association representatives may not be compelled to reveal the substance of
communications, which clearly concern Association business; however, this provision does not
insulate any behavior or conduct, including threats by language or disorderly conduct from being
fully investigated.

D. Prior to any such disciplinary action, the employee and the Association shall be given
written notice of contemplated disciplinary action, stating the action or actions contemplated and
the reasons therefore, and notifying the employee that he may rebut the charges to the Chief,
either orally or in writing, within fourteen (14) calendar days, which time shall be stated in the
notice. Nothing herein requires the City to meet service or procedural requirements in providing
notice to the Association.

E. After the notice and opportunity for rebuttal provided in the preceding paragraph the
Chief may demote, suspend, terminate, or take alternative disciplinary action against an
employee by personal service on the employee of a written statement of charges. If the Chief
should be unable to secure personal service after due diligence, service may be made by placing
it in the mail addressed to the employee's last known address along with delivery of the
statement to the Association, and proof of such service shall be sufficient to support any
disciplinary action. A copy of such statement, along with a copy of the notice of contemplated
disciplinary action, shall be promptly filed with the Director of Human Resources of the City.

The written statement shall point out the particular rule or rules alleged to have been violated
by the employee and the specific act or acts alleged to be in violation. Said statement shall
inform the employee that he has fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt thereof to file a written
appeal with the Director of Human Resources. If alternate service is obtained as provided herein,
the employee shall have fourteen (14) calendar days from service upon the Association.

To appeal from any disciplinary action imposed, the employee need only file a letter
expressing his/her request to appeal to arbitration within such fourteen (14) calendar day period.
Appeal from suspension, termination or demotion shall be decided by one arbitrator, selected
according to this contract.

F. Upon receiving an appeal from an employee or his/her designee, the Director of Human
Resources shall act immediately to notify the Association and Chief of the appeal to arbitration.
When an employee will not be represented by the Association, advance payment of $1,000 for
the arbitrator must be included with the notice for appeal to arbitration in order for the appeal to
be valid. Such advance payment may be waived upon the City's acceptance of a written contract

[Page 18
with the employee for payment of any charges, which might be incurred by the officer as a result
of an appeal to arbitration.

The Director shall immediately request a list of seven (7) qualified neutrals who are members
of the National Academy of Arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association or other
qualified agencies, which may be mutually agreed upon for this purpose. Within seven (7)
calendar days after receipt of the list, the Director of Human Resources shall contact the
employee or his/her designee in order for the employee or his/her designee and the City to
alternately strike the names on the list, and the remaining name shall be the arbitrator. If the
parties cannot agree as to who shall strike first, the parties shall decide by a coin toss.

G. The hearing shall be commenced within such reasonable time as the arbitrator selected
can be scheduled. If the arbitrator selected cannot commence the hearing within fifty (50)
calendar days from his/her selection, cither party may, within five (5) calendar days of so
learning, call for selection of a new arbitrator, and if the parties cannot agree upon a substitute
within five (5) calendar days of so learning, another arbitrator shall be selected from a new list of
seven (7) names immediately requested from the American Arbitration Association, according to
the procedure set out herein. The hearing shall be scheduled so that it can be completed without
break, in consecutive calendar days (excluding weekends and holidays). The arbitrator shall
make an award within thirty (30) calendar days of the close of evidence in standard arbitration
hearings, and within seven (7) calendar days of the close of evidence in expedited arbitration
hearings. Post hearing briefs shall only be permitted in standard arbitration hearings, and must be
mailed to the arbitrator within seven (7) calendar days of the close of evidence in the hearing.

A stenographic transcription of the proceedings shall be made only upon written agreement
of the parties prior to the commencement of the hearing. Should there be no agreement, the party
desiring the transcript may have the transcript made at its sole expense.

The award of the arbitrator shall state which particular factual charges he finds to be true, if
any, and the particular rules he finds such conduct to have violated, if any. Where the charges are
upheld, the award shall state whether the discipline imposed is upheld, or whether some lesser
discipline is substituted.

H. The following rules shall govern the conduct of hearings under this section, and of certain
preliminary matters:

1. Upon the request of either party addressed to the opposing party at least seven (7)
calendar days prior to the date of hearing, the parties shall exchange the names of witnesses
expected to be called at the hearing. Upon failure of a party to disclose such witnesses, the
arbitrator may exclude their testimony. Each party shall pay the subpoena fee of their own non-
city witnesses.

2. The arbitrator shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, records and other evidence,
upon not less than seven (7) calendar days’ notice. Pursuant to such notice, the Director of
Human Resources shall issue subpoenas requested by the parties in the name of the arbitrator. A
party may apply to the arbitrator to quash a subpoena issued by the Director of Human

Page 19
Resources. Any subpoena for records or documents shall not exceed the scope of discovery
allowed by the arbitrator, and shall be served on the Department Director in constructive custody
of such records or documents. Nothing herein shall prohibit the City from seeking common law
relief in the state district court if the arbitrator exceeds his/her jurisdiction in regards to
discovery.

3. In ali hearings under this section, the City shall prove its case by a preponderance of
the evidence.

4. The parties, in writing, may request discovery from each other concerning the case.
Should the other party not agree to provide the requested information within seven (7) calendar
days of the request; the request shall be deemed denied. The requesting party may then apply to
the arbitrator, who shall order such discovery as appropriate to the nature of the case, subject to
tules of discovery in Texas civil cases. In considering the application, the arbitrator shall
consider the burden and expense of producing the information, the need of the requesting party,
the amount of time available prior to the hearing, and such other matters as he may deem
material. In no event shall discovery be permitted to delay the hearing, and in no event shall
discovery be requested within the seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing.

5. All hearings shall be public unless requested by the appealing employee that the
hearing shall be closed to the public. In any event, the final decision of the arbitrator shall be
public, although public announcement may be reasonably delayed upon request of the parties.

6. Unless otherwise provided in this contract, the conduct of the hearing shall be
governed by the rules of the American Arbitration Association.

7. No supervisor may represent any subordinate in disciplinary hearings held under this
Article. The Association President, regardless of rank, or a designee who is not a supervisor is
exempt from the provisions of this paragraph.

I, The arbitrator shall have all powers vested in the Commission under Chapter 143 and the
Commission Rules, with respect to suspensions, terminations, and demotions, except the power
to amend such rules.

J. Any notice or statement required to be filed by the Chief of Police or the employee in a
disciplinary proceeding under Chapter 143, under Commission Rules, or under this contract,
shall be filed with the Director of Human Resources of the City.

K. The decision of the arbitrator is final and binding on all parties. A district court may hear
an appeal of an arbitrator's award only on the grounds that the arbitrator was without jurisdiction
or exceeded his/her jurisdiction or that the order was procured by fraud, collusion, or other
unlawful means.

L. Unless otherwise provided in this contract, in cases of conflict, the provisions of this

contract will control over Chapter 143, Civil Service Commission Rules, and American
Arbitration Association Rules; and Chapter 143 and Civil Service Rules promulgated pursuant to

IPage 20
it shall control over American Arbitration Association Rules or rules of other qualified agencies
as mutually agreed upon for this purpose.

M. A probationary employee may be discharged at the discretion of the Chief, without appeal
to arbitration, to the Commission, or to any court, at any time during the three hundred and sixty-
five (365) calendar-day period subsequent to being commissioned as a police officer.

N. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, the Chief shall have authority to
impose any disciplinary action upon an employee, which is agreed to in writing by the Chief and
the employee. The employee shall have no right to appeal such agreed disciplinary action, and no
administrative or judicial body shall have power to review such disciplinary action or alter the
terms of the agreement.

O. Any deadline or time restrictions set out in this contract with respect to disciplinary
proceedings may be modified by written agreement of the parties. However, neither party may be
compelled to waive its right to insist upon the deadline and time restrictions provided by the
contract.

P. In addition to disciplinary powers vested in the Police Chief, the following supervisors
shall have the right to suspend for cause, said suspensions not to exceed the following limits:

e Assistant Chiefs may suspend from thirty-one (31) work hours to a maximum of
two hundred and forty (240) work hours without pay for any officer;

* Police Commanders may suspend not to exceed twenty-four (24) work hours
without pay for an officer assigned to work an eight (8) hour shift and thirty (30)
work hours without pay for an officer assigned to work a ten (10) hour shift; and

e Police Captains may suspend not to exceed sixteen (16) work hours without pay
for an officer assigned to work an eight (8) hour shift and twenty (20) work hours
without pay for an officer assigned to work a ten (10) hour shift;

Such suspensions may be appealed within seven (7) calendar days to the Chief, and further
appeal shall be to arbitration, according to the procedures for disciplinary actions by the Chief,
except that no pre-suspension notice by the Chief shall be necessary, and the Chief may adopt
the supervisor's letter as his/her own. If an Officer appeals his/her suspension to the Chief, then
the issued suspension will not begin and the fourteen (14) calendar day deadline for requesting
arbitration will not start running until the Chief makes his/her final written decision and notifies
the officer in writing.

Q. In cases of appeal from suspensions, indefinite suspensions, demotions, and promotional
passovers the City and the aggrieved employee are encouraged to voluntarily attend a mediation
to resolve issues raised by an appeal. The City and the aggrieved employee shall share equally
the fees and expenses of the mediation and/or arbitration. Where the Association represents the
employee, it shall share equally the arbitration fees and expenses with the City. All other costs of
mediation and/or arbitration shall be borne by the party incurring those costs.

[Page 21
If the City and the aggrieved employee agree to attend mediation prior to initiating the
arbitration process, the mediation must occur within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the
City and aggrieved employee agree to mediate, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing. Should
the issues not be fully resolved by mediation, the fourteen (14) calendar day deadline for
requesting arbitration will not start running until after mediation is conducted. If the City and the
aggrieved employee agree to attend mediation after the arbitration process is initiated, the
mediation shall occur within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the City and the aggrieved
employee agree to mediate, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing. Any applicable deadlines
for either side are abated until after mediation is conducted.

R. All hearings which are expected to be completed in one (1) day shall be submitted for
expedited arbitration. On all other hearings, the parties may agree to request expedited
arbitration.

S. To the extent that any provision of this Article conflicts with or changes Chapter 143 or
any other civil service statute, the statute is so amended, as authorized by Chapter 174.

T. Any officer temporarily suspended at the discretion of the Chief may be allowed to forfeit
vacation leave, holidays, or compensatory time in lieu of suspension (which means that the
officer forfeits leave but does not have days off, and continues to work his/her regular schedule);
however, any officer temporarily suspended for a period of thirty (30) hours or less shall be
allowed to forfeit vacation leave, holidays, personal leave or compensatory time in lieu of
suspension (in like manner as above) if the officer agrees not to appeal the suspension. After
twenty-four (24) months, the City agrees not to use such un-appealed disciplinary action in any
future disciplinary case.

U. Written reprimands may be issued by any supervisor to an officer without requiring prior
notification. Copies of all written reprimands shall be given to the affected officer. The officer
may reply in a letter of rebuttal within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of the letter of
reprimand, and such letter of rebuttal shall become a part of the officer's permanent civil service
file. No written reprimand shall be placed in the file without the officer's knowledge. Letters of
counseling shall become a part of an officer’s departmental file.

V. If the officer appeals a suspension of thirty (30) hours or less, the losing party shall pay
all fees and expenses of the arbitrator. The arbitrator shall designate the losing party for purposes
of this paragraph, and may find that both parties lost in part and apportion fees and expenses
accordingly.

W. To the extent that any provision conflicts with or changes Chapter 143 or any other
statute, executive order, local ordinance or rule, this Agreement shal! supersede such provisions,
as authorized by Chapter 174 of the Local Government Code.

ARTICLE 8 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A. Scope of Grievance Procedure. The purpose of this grievance procedure is to establish
effective machinery for the fair, expeditious and orderly adjustment of grievances. Only matters

[Page 22
involving the interpretation, application, or enforcement of the terms of this agreement, shall
constitute a grievance under the provisions of this grievance procedure, with the exception of
Whistleblower claims. Any claim of adverse action based on Whistleblower status under Article
554, Government Code, or federal law shall follow the process set forth in Section E.

B. Association Representation, A grievance may be brought under this procedure by one (1)
or more aggrieved employees to the Association or by the Association itself in cases where the
subject of the grievance is an on-going practice by the City which affects the bargaining unit as a
whole (“Class Action’).

C. Time Limitations. The aggrieved employee or employees shall bring the grievance in
writing to the Association within thirty (30) calendar days of its occurrence; or if at the time the
aggrieved employee is unaware of the grievance, within thirty (30) calendar days of aggrieved
employee’s knowledge of its occurrence. The Association in a Class Action shall bring the
grievance to the Chief of Police within thirty (30) calendar days of its occurrence; or if at the
time the Association did not know or should have known of the grievance, within thirty (30)
calendar days of the Association’s knowledge of its occurrence. The time limits prescribed
herein may be waived by mutual agreement, in writing, by the Association and the appropriate
management representative at each step.

D. Steps:

Step 1. Association Review. The aggrieved employee shall submit his/her grievance in
writing to the Association within thirty (30) calendar days as required in Section C. Any
grievance not submitted to the Association within the prescribed time limit shall not be
considered timely and shall be void. Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the grievance,
the Association shall determine whether the grievance is valid and notify the Chief of Police in
writing pursuant to Step 2. The Association shall judge each grievance in a fair and equitable
manner and shall not discriminate against employees who are not Association members, In its
sole discretion, the Association shall determine whether the grievance is valid or not. The
Association may modify, revise, or amend the grievance if necessary to properly place the
dispute in issue for resolution. Only the Association has standing to initiate or pursue a grievance
under the terms of this Agreement, after consideration of an alleged grievance by a bargaining
unit member or the Association.

Step 2. Chief of Police Review. If the grievance is approved by the Association, the
Association shall pursue the grievance to Step 2 with the Chief of Police on the Grievance Form
(Appendix “C”). The written grievance at this step and at all steps thereafter shall contain the
following information: (1) a statement of the grievance setting out the specific provision of this
agreement to be interpreted, applied or enforced and the facts upon which it is based; (2) how the
facts result in a violation of the agreement; (3) the remedy or adjustment sought including a clear
statement of the proper interpretation, application or enforcement of this agreement; and (4) the
signature of the aggrieved employee. The Chief of Police shall respond in writing to this
grievance within sixty (60) calendar days of its receipt. The written response at this step, and
management responses at all steps thereafter, shall contain the following information: (1) an
affirmation or denial of the facts upon which the grievance is based; (2) an analysis of the

Page 23
alleged violation of the agreement; (3) the remedy or adjustment, if any, to be made; (4) the
signature of the appropriate management representative.

The Chief of Police or designee shall hand-deliver a copy of the response to the Association. If
the Chief of Police does not respond within sixty (60) calendar days, the grievance shall be
deemed denied and the Association may proceed to the next step.

The aggrieved employee may not be represented by a member of the department who is in the
aggrieved employee’s chain of command. The Association with or without the consent of the
aggrieved employee may withdraw the grievance at this step.

Step 3. City Manager Review. The Association may submit a written grievance from
Step 2 to the City Manager within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the Chief of Police’s
written response. The City Manager shall respond in writing to this grievance within thirty (30)
calendar days of its receipt. If the City Manager docs not respond within thirty (30) calendar
days, the grievance shall be deemed denied and the Association may proceed to the next step.
Failure of the Association and the City Manager to resolve the grievance in writing or to submit
to arbitration at the conclusion of Step 3 shall be the conclusion of the grievance.

Step 4. Arbitration. The Association may request, within thirty (30) calendar days of the
denial at Step 3, that the grievance be submitted to arbitration.

If arbitration is requested by the Association, the parties may mutually agree to use the
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS), or any other person mutually agreeable to
the parties. If the parties cannot mutually agree, a list of seven (7) qualified neutrals who are
members of the National Academy of Arbitrators shall be requested from the American
Arbitration Association (AAA). The Director of Human Resources, or designee, shall make
contact with the service selected to request a list of qualified neutrals. Within seven (7) calendar
days after receipt of the list, the Director of Human Resources or designee shall contact the
President of the Association or his/her designee in order for the Association and the City to
alternately strike the names on the list, and the remaining name shall be the arbitrator. The City
and the Association shall alternate as to which party strikes first on each list.

The hearing on the grievance shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply.
The arbitrator shall not have the power to add to, subtract from or modify, the provisions of this
agreement in arriving at a decision on the issue or issues presented; and shall confine his/her
decision solely to the precise issue submitted for arbitration, and shall have no authority to
determine any other issues not directly presented in the grievance. The decision of the arbitrator
shall be final and binding upon the aggrieved employee, the Association and the City.

The losing party shall pay all the fees and expenses of the arbitrator. The arbitrator shall
designate the losing party for purposes of this paragraph, and may find that both parties lost in
part and apportion fees and expenses accordingly.

Each party shal! pay the subpoena fee of their own non-city employee witnesses.
E. Whistleblower Claims. The submission shall state specifically each law, which is or was
believed to have been violated and the factual basis for the claimant’s belief that such a violation
occurred. It shall further state each “appropriate law enforcement authority” to whom or which
the violation has been reported. The grievance shall be filed at Step 2 (Chief of Police) and
proceed through the steps in this process, provided however, that if the Chief is implicated in any
of the reports the Chief shall not be included in the steps, other than Step 4, of the grievance
process, In that instance, the City Manager shall designate the alternate step.

ARTICLE 9 - HOURS OF WORK

A. Workweek, The workweek shall consist of forty (40) hours per seven (7) day work cycle.
“Regular rate” and “regular rate of pay” as used in this agreement means base pay and longevity
only, in accordance with historical payroll practice, and does not have any statutorily derived
meaning. A meal break may be taken during the shift scheduled in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the department. Notwithstanding any other provision in this agreement, the City
shall be entitled to implement and qualify for meal time credit under the provisions of Section
142.0015(i), Local Government Code, and 29 C.F.R. 553.223 and 785.19. Any work required in
holdover from a shift shall not be compensable unless it exceeds fifteen (15) minutes. Where
fifteen (15) minutes is exceeded, all time worked in holdover from shift shall be paid at the
overtime rate, calculated in fifteen (15) minute intervals. Any time in excess of any fifteen (15)
minute interval shall be compensated to the next quarter hour.

B. Qvertime. Overtime shall be defined as authorized work performed in excess of the
regular workweek. Where overtime occurs as a result of shift assignment change all employees
excluding those serving at the rank of Police Commander or above may elect to be paid straight
time for the time worked or an equal amount of compensatory time. Where the employee elects
to be paid, calculation for pay shall be made during the pay period in which the overtime was
accrued. Productive time for the purposes of calculating overtime in a workweek includes
vacation leave, holidays, sick leave, and compensatory time, and any other authorized leave.
Both parties believe that the pay and benefits under this agreement exceed the statutory
minimums set by federal and state law for straight and overtime pay. In any enforcement action
under federal or state law, the City shall be entitled to credit for all payments made under this
contract which exceed the statutory pay obligations, including but not limited to the foregoing
“productive time” provision, irrespective of the pay period or pay cycle when such occurred. The
City shall also be entitled to the full extent of the partial exemption under 29 U.S.C. 207 (k) in
any such enforcement action. Should any court rule or hold that the City is not entitled to the full
credit provided herein, the City may reopen negotiations during the term of this contract to
address any issue necessary as a result of such ruling, and the duty of each party to bargain under
Chapter 174 shall apply. Except as provided below, all employees, excluding those serving at the
tank of Police Commander or Assistant Police Chief, may elect to be compensated for overtime
either in cash at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay, or
in compensatory time equal to one and one-half (1-1/2) times the actual hours of overtime
worked for all other overtime worked. Overtime worked for which the City will be reimbursed
for overtime by Federal or State Grants that restrict compensation for such overtime to cash only
will be compensated in cash only. In addition to the above, the City and Officers will recognize
and comply with all limits placed on overtime by the Federal and/or State Grants. Officers shall
be notified prior to accepting such an assignment that the payment for overtime shall be in cash
only and not compensatory time. Scheduling of compensatory time shall be at the discretion of
the Chief. Effective upon adoption of this Agreement, in the event of separation in good
standing, the City shall pay accrued compensatory time not to exceed three hundred and sixty
(360) hours at the employee's regular rate of pay. Effective August 1, 2011, in the event of
separation in good standing, the City shall pay accrued compensatory time not to exceed four
hundred and eighty (480) hours at the employee's regular rate of pay. Effective upon execution of
this Agreement not more than three hundred and sixty (360) hours of compensatory time may be
accrued, Effective August 1, 2011 not more than four hundred and eighty (480) hours of
compensatory time may be accrued.

Overtime at the rate of two (2) times the regular rate of pay will be paid for work
performed on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and Easter Sunday. Overtime at the rate of one
and one-half (1-1/2) times the regular rate of pay will be paid for work performed on any other
holiday listed in Article 11.

In an effort to minimize non-volunteer overtime for events scheduled ninety (90) calendar
days or more in advance, the Chief will have posted sign-up sheets for voluntary overtime
assignments thirty (30) calendar days prior to the event. Sign-up sheets will remain posted until
two (2) workweeks prior to event. Based upon the sign-up list, non-voluntary overtime
assignments will be made or rescheduling will be done by the City in order to provide the
necessary on duty police services for the event.

When ordered by the Chief to work during an emergency or assigned to some duty not
normally attendant to their supervisory and management responsibility of their job assignment or
division, Commanders shall be compensated at the rate of one and a half (1-1/2) times and may
be compensated in cash or compensatory time, for those hours worked over and above the
regular forty (40) hour workweek.

C. Court Time and Call Back.

1. Employees while off duty that are called back to duty or subpoenaed to give testimony
in court about events arising out of their employment shall be compensated at the rate of one and
one-half (1-1/2) times the employee’s regular rate of pay with the minimum compensation of
three (3) hours.

2. Employees who are subpoenaed while on vacation to give testimony about events
arising out of their employment shall be compensated during the first eight (8) hours of
testimony for the employee’s vacation time in that workweek as well as compensated for actual
hours worked at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee’s regular pay with a
minimum compensation of two (2) hours. Compensation for subsequent Court testimony after
the initial eight (8) hours shall be at the rate of the employee's regular pay.

3. Employees who are called back to duty while on vacation shall be compensated for
the employee's vacation time in that workweek as well as pay with a minimum compensation of
two (2) hours, except that where an emergency exists, the employee's vacation may be canceled
by the Chief, whereupon said employee shall be paid at his/her regular rate of pay.

4. The Association and the City shall work together in the Labor-Management Relations
Committee in an effort to minimize unnecessary standby time.

5. Restricted on-call compensation. Off-duty employees who are ordered by the Chief to
be on restricted on-call duty shall be compensated at a rate of $1.00 per hour while assigned to
such on-call duty. On-call duty restrictions shall be determined by departmental policy.

D. Deferred Compensation for Overtime. The City shall establish a policy under which
officers who participate in a deferred compensation plan which has been approved by the City
shall be eligible to defer all accrued overtime in increments of one (1) hour or more into their
deferred compensation plan. The policy shall require prior designation by the employee of the
election to participate for a period of at least six (6) months, All overtime deferred under such
policy shall be deposited directly to the officer's account in such deferred compensation plan.
The City may require that the employee release and hold the City harmless for any penalties or
other liability incurred by the City as a result of allowing the employee to defer overtime
compensation under this provision.

ARTICLE 10 - SALARY AND BENEFITS
A. Monthly Salary Schedule

1. The basic ranks and classifications within the City of Corpus Christi Police
Department shall be established by the City by ordinance pursuant to Texas Local Government
Code Section 143.021 and its management rights.

2. The Parties agree that the applicable monthly pay rates for the current Police Officer
basic ranks and steps within the Department will continue at their respective current rates from
the date this Agreement is ratified and executed until October 1, 2017.

3. Effective October 1, 2017, the monthly pay rates for the basic ranks and steps within

the Department will be as follows which includes a two percent (2%) increase for Fiscal Year
2017-2018 and a two percent (2%) increase for Fiscal Year 2018-2019:

Effective October 1, 2017 (2%)

Class Title eee [ste [ror Lm [ore [|

[Trainee [3687 [| [|

pe ie

PO?

Se 4,496
Senior
Officer

    
    

   
POS Lieutenant | 6,510 6,673 | 6,838 7,013 | 7,364

Class Class B
Code Starting Jomo [atmo [acme | come |

[oa | captain ]7,s11_[7,661_ [7,744 [7,857 [7,939 |

     
  

     

Effective October 1, 2018 (2%)

Class

3761
Police

4,368
Senior
Officer

 
 
       
  
   

 
 

 

   
  
   

   
 

  

Class :
Code Class Title starting

[roa | captain [7,662 _|

Qualifications:

7,814

1899

1. Senior Officer. To qualify for a pay step at sixty (60) months of service as a Senior
Officer, each Senior Officer must possess and Advanced Certificate from TCOLE or a bachelor’s
degree from an accredited college or university. To qualify for a pay step at one hundred and
twenty (120) months of service as a Senior Officer, each Senior Officer must possess either a
Master Peace Officers Certificate from TCOLE or a bachelor’s degree from an accredited
college or university.

2. Lieutenant. To qualify for a pay step at sixty (60) months of service as a Lieutenant,
each Lieutenant must possess a Master Peace Officer’s Certificate from TCOLE or bachelor’s
degree from an accredited college or university. To qualify for a pay step at one hundred and
twenty (120) months of service as a Lieutenant, each Lieutenant must possess a bachelor’s
degree from an accredited college or university. If a Senior Officer is promoted to Lieutenant,
the employee shall be placed in the pay step that gives the employee an increase in pay. Current

[Page 28
Lieutenants who have one hundred and eighty (180) months of service or more as a Lieutenant at
the date of execution of this agreement shall be entitled to this step without a bachelor’s degree,
but this provision shall not apply to any person without a bachelor’s degree thereafter. To the
extent that any provision of this article conflicts with or changes Chapter 143 or any other
statute, executive order, local ordinance or rule, this agreement shall supersede such provisions,
as authorized by Chapter 174 of the Texas Local Government Code.

B. Health Insurance and Life Premiums

1. Health Care Plan: The City shall provide health care coverage for Police Officers and
their dependents. The plan(s) will be called Public Safety Citicare.

The City shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the employee’s premium and fifty percent
(50%) of the premium for dependent coverage towards the Public Safety Citicare Plan. Premium
rates shall be determined using the agreed methodology described in this Agreement. In the
event alternate plans are introduced in the future, the dollar amount of City Contribution will
always be based upon the outcome of this provision toward all plans and employee tiers of
coverage unless otherwise agreed upon by the Association.

The City agrees to provide the Association and/or its consultant(s) information used by the City
to determine premiums (with the exception of information subject to privacy limitations under
the state or federal law, including HIPPAA, unless proper agreements or authorizations have
been executed).

The City will notify the Association, in advance, of any Employee Insurance Advisory
Committee meetings. The Association will be allowed to have representation on the Employee
Insurance Advisory Committee, and on any committees formed to evaluate proposals in response
to Requests for Proposals related to negotiated benefits of the bargaining unit.

The City shall notify the Association in writing of premium increases with a minimum of sixty
(60) calendar days’ notice of any change, and of health plan changes with a minimum of thirty
(30) calendar days’ notice of any change.

The City retains the right to negotiate with insurance carriers, third party administrators and their
related sub-contractors and/or medical providers to provide insurance coverage or administration
of the Public Safety Citicare Plan(s).

The benefits in the plan that will be negotiated will be hospitalization deductibles, maximum out
of pocket amounts, co-pays and co-insurance percentages.

Participating Provider Service Areas shall always include the following areas: Corpus Christi and
the surrounding area, South Texas, Dallas/ Ft Worth, Houston, San Antonio/Laredo and Austin.

Out of Network is the use of any hospital, physician or other health care facility or professional
that has not signed an agreement with the City’s preferred provider network.

[Page 29
In the event a covered member does not live or work in an area with in-network providers, and in
cases of emergency care, services provided outside the participating provider service areas will
be provided at the in-network level of benefits.

The City will fulfill its obligations to conduct a bi-annual actuarial study of the GASB liability
and adjust the cumulative recorded OPEB liability accordingly.

Plan changes mandated by federal health care legislation will be implemented as required. The
Association will be notified of such changes.

The following components will be used to calculate the premiums for active employees and

retirees under age 65:

1.

Third Party Administrator (TPA) administrative fees

2. Stop loss premiums

3.

4.

a

Incurred and paid medical and prescription drug claims (after stop loss

adjustments, rebates, subrogation recoveries, coordination of benefits
recoveries) of all plan participants (active employees, retirees, and
participating dependents), with allowance for adjustment based upon
expected benefit plan, enrollment or other changes. The base time frame
for this data will be based upon a consecutive seventeen (17) month time
period ending seven (7) months prior of effective date of such rate and
benefit changes. The resulting net claim factors will be converted to a
twelve (12) month equivalent for purposes of establishing the base claims
factor to be used in the calculation to determine contributions.

A prorated contribution toward the cost of an onsite primary care clinic

(the percentage of members covered under the Public Safety Plans divided
by the total covered members under the City’s health plans who are
eligible to use the clinic times the estimated annual cost of the clinic).

Incurred But Not Reported (IBNR) claims, as actuarially determined.

The net change in forecasted and prior period catastrophic reserve funding

(10% of actuarial projected claims expense).

Assumptions for inflation and trend components used to estimate future

claims will incorporate prevailing plan specific, regional, and national
trends, as well as the anticipated impact of any mandated benefits, and any
other factor(s) determined to impact the overall trend. Actuarial and
consulting input from both parties will agree upon the factor(s) applied in
accordance with professional, ethical and generally accepted practices. If
agreement is not reached, within two (2) weeks after the actuary report is
provided to the Association, the City will implement the recommendation

[Page 30
of its Actuary. The City must notify the Association in writing of its intent
to implement its actuarial recommendation. The Association has seven (7)
calendar days from receipt of that notice to appeal in writing to the City
Manager and request the dispute resolution process as outlined below.
Each party’s actuary shall mutually agree within seven (7) calendar days
upon a third neutral actuary. The parties shall submit position papers
within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of his/her selection. A
decision in writing by the neutral actuary as to the factors applied to
determine the contribution requirements for active employees and retirees
under age 65 shall be delivered to the parties within seven (7) calendar
days and shall be binding on all parties. Each party shall pay the total fees
and expenses of their own actuary and each shall pay half of the fees and
expenses of the neutral actuary.

8. The cumulative net fund balance.

The initial fund balance to be used for the first measurement period will be
the actual Public Safety Fund Balance, but not be less than $4,000,588.22
Net fund balances (the difference between the total fund balance and the
OPEB liability) for the plan will carry forward throughout this Agreement.
The balance allocated for OPEB liability on July 31, 2009 is agreed to be
$2,152,317.00.

In the event that the net fund balance becomes less than thirty percent
(30%) of the forecasted plan expenses (excluding the amount allocated to
IBNR and catastrophic reserves) the Association and the City will take
action through either plan design changes or funding amounts to maintain
a minimum fund balance of thirty percent (30%) of the forecasted plan
expenses (excluding the amount allocated to IBNR and catastrophic
reserves). The City and the Association will not be obligated to agree but
reserve the right to agree to an increase in the funding or a change in
benefits if the minimum fund balance is projected to be higher than 30%
of the forecasted plan expenses (excluding the amount allocated to IBNR
and catastrophic reserves) in order to mitigate future changes to the plan.

 

a. The plan shall be structured as follows:
PUBLIC SAFETY CITICARE
BENEFITS IN NETWORK OUT OF NETWORK

(Participating Providers)

 

 

 

PLAN YEAR No Plan Year Deductible | $200 Per Individual
DEDUCTIBLE $500 Max. Family
PHYSICIAN SERVICES

 

 

 

 

[Page 31
 

In-Patient

 

 

 

Out-Patient $15 Co-Pay 70/30%

Emergency Room Coinsurance

Lab Work

Physician’s Office $10 Co-Pay 70/30%

Lab Facilities Coinsurance

Hospitals

X-RAYS

Physician’s Office $10 Co-Pay 70/30%

X-Ray Facilities $15 Co-Pay Coinsurance

Emergency Room Services | $50 Co-Pay Then 80/20% | 70/30%
Coinsurance Coinsurance

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hospitalization $200 Per Individual 70/30% Coinsurance
In-Patient $600 Max Family
Deductible
Then
85/15% Coinsurance
Hospitalization $100 Deductible Per 70/30% Coinsurance
Out-Patient Individual
$250 Max. Family
Deductible
Then
85/15% Coinsurance
Retail Prescriptions Co-Pays:
$0 Generic No Deductible
$20 Preferred Brand 70/30% Coinsurance
$40 Non-Preferred Brand
Prescriptions Co-Pays:
Mandatory Mail Order $0 Generic No Deductible
90day and Maintenance $20 Preferred Brand 70/30% Coinsurance
Prescriptions $40 Non-Preferred Brand
Out-Of-Pocket Cost $500 Per Individual $700 Per Individual

Excluding Co-Pays &
Deductibles

 

$1,250 Max. Family

 

$1,750 Max. Family

 

Lifetime maximum Benefit = $2,000,000, unless otherwise required by law.

b. Public Safety Citicare CDHP (Consumer Driven Health Plan) with Health Savings

Account

This plan will be offered concurrently with the plan described in section b, with employees
having the option to participate in either plan. Election of the Public Safety Citicare CDHP with

HSA can only be made at the time of hire or during the open enrollment period.

 
The plan design will be:

 

 

 

 

 

 

BENEFITS IN NETWORK OUT OF NETWORK
(Participating Providers)
PLAN YEAR $2,600 Per Individual $3,500 Per Individual
DEDUCTIBLE $5,200 Per Family $7,000 Max. Family
{Embedded)
PHYSICIAN SERVICES Subject to deductible and
In-Patient then 100% coverage 70/30% Coinsurance
Out-Patient
Emergency Room
Lab Work
Physician’s Office Subject to deductible and 70/30% Coinsurance
Lab Facilities then 100% coverage
Hospitals
X-RAYS Subject to deductible and
Physician’s Office then 100% coverage 70/30% Coinsurance
X-Ray Facilities
Emergency Room Services | Subject to deductible and 70/30% Coinsurance

then 100% coverage

 

 

 

 

 

Hospitalization Subject to deductible and 70/30% Coinsurance
(In-Patient) then 100% coverage
Hospitalization Subject to deductible and 70/30% Coinsurance
(Out-Patient) then 100% coverage
Retail Prescriptions Co-Pays (will only apply to 70/30% Coinsurance
eligible preventive care
drugs, all other drugs are
subject to the deductible):
$0 Generic
$20 Preferred Brand
$40 Non-Preferred Brand
Mandatory Mail Order Co-Pays (will only apply to 70/30% Coinsurance
(90day and Maintenance) eligible preventive care

 

drugs, all other drugs are
subject to the deductible):
$0 Generic
$20 Preferred Brand
$40 Non-Preferred Brand

 

 

 

[Page

33
 

Out-Of-Pocket Cost $0 Per Individual $2,000 Per Individual
(Excluding Co-Pays & $0 Max Family $4,000 Max Family
Deductibles)

 

 

 

Lifetime Maximum Benefit = $2,000,000 unless otherwise required by law.

All in-network co-pays count toward the annual (embedded) deductibles. Eligible in-network
preventive drug expenses are not subject to the deductible.

The City will contribute no less than $75 per month into an HSA account for each eligible
employee participating in the CDHP Plan. The CDHP Plan will price overall funding
contributions at a factor of 0.77 times the funding rates for the Public Safety Citicare Plan.
Following the first plan year anniversary after the implementation of the CDHP Plan, the actual
amount of the City’s contribution into the HSA account will be 0.75 times the difference
between the Public Safety Citicare Plan total employee only rate and the rate and the rate
charged for the Public Safety CDHP Plan (HSA). In the event that the CDHP Plan benefits or
rates are adjusted any revisions to the benefits will be incorporated into the pricing differential
between the CDHP and the offered Public Safety Citicare Plan and the contributions made
toward the HSA account will continue as described in this Agreement. As a health plan expense,
funds for the HSA contribution will be allocated to the health plan fund, as all other related
contributions, and then disbursed to individual HSA accounts.

c. Provisions Applying to All Offered Plans as of January 1, 2011

HPV vaccinations up to age 25 will be covered at one hundred percent (100%) up to a $500
annual maximum benefit and not subject to any co-pay or cost sharing provision.

The routine mammography benefit will have a per procedure maximum benefit of $150 not
subject to any co-pay or cost sharing provision.

Benefits for Hospice Care, both facility and home based care, will be covered as any other
iliness, maximum of ninety (90) days coverage per lifetime.

Benefits for Home Health Care and Skilled Nursing Facility Care will_be covered as any other
illness, maximum of ninety (90) days coverage per plan year.

d. Compliance with Federal and State Laws

If the City believes that state or federal laws require a plan change in order to avoid penalties and
excise taxes, to satisfy the statutory and legal coverage and benefit requirements and to preserve
the flexibility to make needed changes to comply with the federal and state laws, including but
not limited to the Affordable Care Act’s complex and evolving requirements, the City shall
notify the Association in writing of its desire to make such plan changes. The parties shall meet
and confer in good faith for a period of thirty (30) calendar days to try and come to a mutual
agreement regarding the City’s proposed changes to the Public Safety Citicare Health Insurance
Plan or whatever health care plan is in place for Public Safety. If the parties are unable to reach

Page 34
an agreement within thirty (30) calendar day period, then the parties mutually agree to retain a
qualified licensed professional health insurance expert to assist in this effort. The retained expert
will be authorized to effect only those changes to the Plan which are minimally necessary to
ensure that the City and the Public Safety Health Insurance Plan are not subject to any penalties
and excise taxes and to ensure that the Plan complies with any Federal and State Laws.

e. Affordable Care Act Cadillac Tax and Health Care Plan Transition

If the Affordable Care Act is still in effect on April 1, 2017 and the City is subject any excise
taxes, penalties or liabilities, commonly referred to as the “Cadillac Tax,” for Public Safety
Citicare Health Insurance Plan or whatever health care plan is in place for Public Safety at the
time, the parties shall meet and confer beginning May 1, 2017 for a period of thirty (30) calendar
days and discuss in good faith any excise taxes, penalties or liabilities that are to be levied
against the City by the ACA and how to modify the Public Safety Citicare Health Insurance Plan
so that the City is not subject to the Cadillac tax. The parties will mutually agree to retain a
qualified licensed professional health insurance expert to assist in this effort. If no resolution is
arrived at after the meet and confer period, the retained expert is authorized to effect only those
changes to the Plan which are minimally necessary to ensure the City and the Public Safety
Citicare Health Insurance Plan are not subject to the Cadillac Tax and any other excise taxes,
penalties or liabilities under the ACA. In no event will the City pay any taxes or penalties as a
result of the Public Safety Citicare Health Insurance Plan.

2. Retiree Health Insurance Coverage.

Employees who retire under the conditions of regular TMRS retirement, and their
participating dependents, covered on the last day of employment, shall be eligible to continue
participation in the City’s group health insurance program at monthly premiums subject to
periodic changes in rates as required. The total cost of such continued coverage shall be paid
entirely by the retiree and/or spouse. The spouse’s rights shall continue after the employee’s
death, but shall terminate upon divorce. Coverage shall remain in force for the retiree while paid
until he or she becomes eligible for Medicare or reaches age 65 at which time coverage in the
Public Safety Citicare Plan will cease. While the retiree remains in the City’s group health
insurance program or fully insured plan offerings for Medicare eligible retirees coverage shall
remain in force for the retiree’s spouse while paid until he or she becomes eligible for Medicare
or reaches age 65 at which time coverage in the Public Safety Citicare Plan shall cease. Coverage
shall remain in force for the retiree’s participating dependent children while paid until they
become ineligible as defined in the plan at which time coverage in the Public Safety Citicare
Plan shall cease. Medicare eligible retirees and Medicare eligible dependents will be eligible to
participate in the City’s fully insured plan offerings for Medicare eligible retirees.

3. Association Supplemental Insurance Programs. The Association may select and
change any group supplemental insurance coverage for officers and/or dependents in which plan.

officers may opt to participate. The City will provide payroll deduction for any officer
participating who authorizes same to cover any additional amount of premium for such
participation. The Association shall give the City at least thirty (30) calendar days advanced
written notice of any change in the plan, eligible participants, or the amount of premiums. The

[Page 35
City will contribute $47.00 per month, per officer, for any officer opting to participate in any
selected plan. The City shall contribute an additional $15.00 per month, per officer, with
dependents toward any selected plan for such officers provided that a minimum of seventy-five
percent (75%) of officers with dependent(s) opt to participate. Any administration fee surplus
account may be used by the Association in any manner prescribed by its Executive Board of
Directors.

4. Life Insurance. The City shall provide basic life insurance coverage for each
police officer, to include Lieutenants, equal to that employee’s annual base salary. Captains,
Commanders and Assistant Chiefs shall be provided basic life insurance coverage equal to their
annual base salary or $50,000.00 whichever is greater.

C. Field Training Officer Pay. Field Training Officer pay of $200 per month shall be
granted in addition to regular pay to all officers for extraordinary, specific duties of training and
evaluating recruit officers.

D. Education Incentive Pay.

1. No probationary employee will be eligible for educational incentive pay until after
he/she has successfully passed his/her probationary period. Specific hours obtained through
participation in the Police Academy will be considered applicable toward educational incentive
pay only after successful completion of at least one other academic course in the related field on
the employee's own time.

2, Educational Incentive Pay will be $1.00 per month for each semester hour
satisfactorily completed provided that such hours are applicable toward a degree. Also the
following monetary caps will apply: no more than $71.00 per month will be paid without
successful completion of the requirements and receipt of the Associate degree; if the employee is
attending a four-year college, he may meet this requirement by filing a copy of his/her certified
degree plan with the Director of Human Resources, noting his/her expressed intent to obtain a
Bachelor’s Degree. All approved hours above the Associate Degree will be eligible for
educational pay at this rate up to an additional $49.00 per month or a combined total of $120.00
per month.

Successful completion of the requirements and receipt of a Bachelor's Degree will
qualify the employee for $125.00 per month.

Approved hours above the Bachelor’s Degree applicable toward a Master’s Degree will
be eligible for educational incentive pay at the same rate up to an additional $20.00 per month.
Successful completion of the Master’s Degree will qualify the employee for $155.00 per month.

E. Clothing and Equipment.

1. The City shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the cost to provide every
uniformed employee with all required initial clothing items and equipment, excluding shoes.

[Page 36
Thereafter the City shall replace or repair all said required clothing items and equipment,
which are lost or damaged on the basis of one hundred percent (100%) excluding shoes. A
clothing allowance of $900.00 per year shall be paid to all Officers who are required by order of
the Chief to wear civilian clothing during their regular work assignment. Employees shall receive
the clothing allowance in a separate payment. Such payments will be made no later than within
first full month after the beginning of the fiscal year, or when assigned. The parties agree that
the allowances provided herein reasonably approximate the amount of the expenses incurred
periodically by the officers. Officers transferred to or from a division receiving clothing
allowance will not be eligible to receive more than a combined total of nine hundred dollars
($900.00) in patrol pay and clothing allowance for any fiscal year.

2. A uniform cleaning allowance of $60 per month shall be provided to each officer of the
department for the purpose of uniform and clothing cleaning and maintenance.

F. Pensions. The City will enroll employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System and
provide the following benefits under the plan:

1. Employee Deposit Rate of 6%

Municipal Current Matching Ratio of 2 to 1

Updated Service Credits

Annuity Increase 70% of CPI

Military Service Credit

Vesting Requirement 5 years

Service Retirement Eligibility 5 years at age 60, 20 years at Any Age
Restricted Prior Service Credit

SPNAWPE YN

Effective January 1, 2019 the City will enroll employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement
System and provide the following benefits under the plan:

Employee Deposit Rate of 7%

Municipal Current Matching Ratio of 2 to 1

Updated Service Credits

Annuity Increase 70% of CPI

Military Service Credit

Vesting Requirement 5 years

Service Retirement Eligibility 5 years at age 60, 20 years at Any Age
Restricted Prior Service Credit

oR ne ence oe

G. Deferred Compensation Plan.

Officers may participate in the deferred compensation plan, adopted by the City Council on
December 8, 2009.

The City will notify the Association, in advance, of any Deferred Compensation Plan
Committee meetings. The Association will be allowed to have representation on the Deferred

[Page 37
Compensation Plan Committee, and on any committees formed to evaluate proposals in response
to Requests for Proposals related to the deferred compensation plan.

The City and the Association agree that the deferred compensation plan selected by the
Corpus Christi Police Officers’ Association and offered through VALIC (The Variable Life
Insurance Company) will be closed to new participants effective upon the execution of this
Agreement.

H. Classifications Compensated Under the City’s Classification and Compensation Plan.
The positions of Assistant Police Chief and Police Commander shall be compensated at salary
levels set forth within the City’s Classification and Compensation Plan consistent with the
provisions provided under City’s Personnel Ordinance.

Individual salary increases based on merit, performance or other, as authorized by
compensation ordinance shall be permitted for these classifications, Chapter 143
notwithstanding. As to Assistant Chiefs and Commanders, all officers in the same classification
are not entitled to the same base salary; this provision specifically supersedes Section 143.041.

1. Termination Pay. Upon termination, sick leave shall be paid to police officers according
to the following schedule:

(a) Less than 4 full years of service: zero hours

(b) 4 full years of service: not more than 240-hours

(c) 5 full years of service: not more than 320-hours

(d) 6 full years of service: not more than 400-hours

(c) 7 full years of service: not more than 480-hours

(f) 8 full years of service: not more than 560-hours

(g) 9 full years of service: not more than 640-hours

(h) 10 or more full years of service: not more than 720-hours
(i) 20 or more full years of service: not more than 960-hours
G) 25 or more full years of service: not more than 1,440-hours

1. Effective upon execution of the Agreement, the first seven hundred and twenty (720) hours of
such sick leave credit shall be paid at the rate of pay determined in accordance with the statutory
calculation under Section 143.045. The remaining balance, if any, shall be paid at the rate of pay
including only base pay plus longevity.

2. Effective upon adoption of this Agreement, in the event of separation in good standing, the
City shall pay accrued compensatory time not to exceed three hundred and sixty (360) hours at
the employee’s regular rate of pay. Effective August 1, 2011, in the event of separation in good
standing, the City shall pay accrued compensatory time not to exceed four hundred and eighty
(480) hours at the employee’s regular rate of pay.

J. Longevity Pay. Longevity pay shall be $6.00 per month for each complete year of service
up to a maximum of ten (10) years of service. Thereafter, for each additional year of service,
longevity pay shall be $4.00 per month for each year up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) years
of service.

Page 38
K. Bomb Squad Pay. Employees assigned to the bomb squad shall receive extra pay for such
hazardous duty in the amount of $75.00 per month.

L. Breathalyzer Certification Pay. All employees currently certified as Breathalyzer
operators shall receive extra pay in the amount of $30.00 per month.

M. Weekend Pay. Each officer who reports to work for a shift, which commences, between
10:00 p.m. on Friday and 9:59 p.m. on Saturday shall receive $50.00 per month; each officer
who reports to work for a shift which commences between 10:00 p.m. on Saturday and 9:59 p.m,
on Sunday shall receive $50.00 per month.

N. Shift Differential Pay. Each officer who reports to work for his/her regularly scheduled
shift which ends between 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 Midnight shall receive $50.00 per month; each
officer who reports to work for his/her regularly scheduled shift which ends between 12:01 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m. shall receive $75.00 per month.

O. Shift Changes. If, as the result of a change in shift or assignment, any officer loses
Weekend and/or Shift Differential Pay, which he was receiving prior to such change, the loss of
such additional pay shall not be grievable under the grievance procedure established in this
contract.

P. Dog Handler Pay. Any Officer who is charged with the responsibility for and is assigned
a dog by the Corpus Christi Police Department to be used in law enforcement functions shall be
compensated at the rate of $170.00 per month and one (1) hour of overtime pay on days off,
including vacation time, sick leave, compensatory time and personal leave. The parties agree that
an accurate computation of hours of work caring for a police dog is difficult or impossible to
determine and that the compensation provided herein is a fair and reasonable agreement
considering all pertinent facts and circumstances. If a police dog is retired (taken out of service
by the city) the Chief of Police shall award the police dog to the officer if the officer so desires.
The City shall have no further obligation for the care, maintenance and support of the police dog,

Q. SWAT Team Pay. Any Officer who is selected and serves as a member of the Special
Weapons and Tactics Team (SWAT) for the Corpus Christi Police Department shall be
compensated at the rate of $75.00 per month.

R. Hostage Negotiation Team Pay. Any Officer who is selected and serves as a member of
the Hostage Negotiation Team for the Corpus Christi Police Department shall be compensated at
the rate of $50.00 per month.

S. Dive Team. Any officer who is selected and serves as a member of the Dive Team for the
Corpus Christi Police Department shall be compensated at the rate of $75.00 per month.

T. Badges. Upon retirement the employee shall be permitted to keep their badge at no cost to

the employee. Upon promotion the employee shall be permitted to keep any badge they have
purchased.

[Pape 39
U. Patrol Pay. Each officer, regardless of rank who has not been designated by the Chief to
receive a clothing allowance will receive a lump sum payment of $504.00. Such payments will be
made no later than within the first full month after the beginning of the fiscal year. Officers
transferred to or from a division receiving clothing allowance will not be eligible to receive more
than a combined total of $900.00 in patrol pay and clothing allowance for any fiscal year.

ARTICLE 11 - LEAVE

A. Holidays

1. Each employee shall receive the following seven (7) holidays during each fiscal year:

 

   

 

 

  
 
 

 

 

Thanksgiving Day

Christmas Da
Fourth of July One holiday to be determined by City
Labor Day

 

 

2. Holiday time shall be added to vacation time.

3. The Chief may determine whether holidays are taken on the calendar date or the City
designated holiday date, taking into consideration the assignments and work schedules of the
various divisions. Unless otherwise specified by the Chief, each of the listed holidays shall be
observed on the calendar day on which it falls.

4. Any employee who for any reason is absent without pay on a workday immediately
preceding or following a holiday or on the holiday shall not be paid for the holiday unless
worked, in which case he shall be paid only at his/her regular rate of pay.

5. Police officers shall be credited with eight (8) hours if employee is assigned to an eight
(8) hour shift or ten (10) hours if employee is assigned to a ten (10) hour shift for holiday leave
with pay for each of the above holidays during the period of the calendar year the officer worked.

B. Vacations.

1. Police officers shall be entitled to one hundred and twenty (120) hours vacation a
year, which shall accrue on the basis of twenty-six (26) biweekly pay periods a year. Police
officers beginning their sixteenth (16") year of continuous service shall begin to accrue one
hundred and forty (144) hours of vacation a year which shall accrue on the basis of twenty-six
(26) biweekly pay periods a year. Police officers beginning their twenty-first (21") year of
continuous service shall begin to accrue one hundred and sixty-eight (168) hours of vacation a
year, which shall accrue on the basis of twenty-six (26) biweekly pay periods a year. Police
officers beginning twenty-sixth (26'") year of continuous service shall begin to accrue two
hundred (200) hours of vacation a year, which shall accrue on the basis of twenty-six (26)
biweekly pay periods a year. After thirty (30) years of continuous service, police officers shall
accrue two hundred and forty (240) hours a year, which shall accrue on the basis of twenty-six
(26) biweekly pay periods a year. For police officers scheduled to work forty (40) hours a week,
eight (8) working hours per day shall be counted as used for vacation purposes.

2. When the City schedules vacations, employees shall be given preference as to
vacation selection on the basis of seniority by work unit to the extent that such scheduling will
not interfere with City operations. Work units shall be defined by the City.

3. All employees hired after October 16, 1998, shall be allowed to accrue unlimited
vacation leave hours (includes holiday leave hours), but upon retirement, resignation or
termination the employee shall not be paid in excess of four hundred and eighty (480) hours. All
employees hired on or before October 16, 1998, shall be allowed to accrue unlimited vacation
leave hours (includes holiday leave hours), but upon retirement, resignation or termination the
employee shall not be paid for accrued hours in excess of a cap of seven hundred and twenty
(720) hours plus an amount equal to the accrued hours the employee had on the books as of
October 16, 1998. The City shall notify each employee as to what their accrued vacation leave
bank was as of October 16, 1998.

(For example, a current employee had five hundred (500) hours of accrued leave on the
books as of October 16, 1998. Upon retirement, resignation or termination the employee had one
thousand eight hundred (1800) hours of accrued leave. The City shall pay the employee for one
thousand two hundred and twenty (1,220) hours - includes the seven hundred and twenty (720)
hour cap plus the five hundred (500) hours for that employee as established on October 16, 1998.
If upon retirement, resignation or termination, the employee had six hundred and fifty (650)
hours of accrued leave, the City shall pay the employee only for six hundred and fifty (650)
hours.

C. Personal Leave.

Employees are entitled to forty (40) hours of personal leave. Personal leave is not
accruable and will be lost if not used within the particular FY received.

D. Military Leave. Any permanent employee who presents official orders requiring his/her
attendance for a period of training or other active duty as a member of the United States Armed
Forces, the Texas State Reserve Corps, or the Texas State Guard shall be entitled to military
leave with pay for a period or periods not exceeding a total of one hundred and twenty (120)
hours in any one (1) calendar year. Any permanent employee who leaves his/her position for the
purpose of entering the Armed Forces of the United States, or enters State service as a member
of the Texas National Guard or Texas State Guard or as a member of the reserve components of
the Armed Forces of the United States shall, if discharged, separated or released from such active
military service under honorable conditions be restored to employment in accordance with the
terms of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA). In
order to qualify for re-employment, the employee must comply with the requirements of
USERRA. The Civil Service Commission shall adopt a promotional process in compliance with
state and federal law for eligible officers on active duty military assignment.
Effective with the signing of this agreement officers who were serving on active military duty as
members of the armed forces and who were cligible promotional candidates according to the
tules as set out by USERRA when a department promotional exam was offered, who did not take
the exam, may take the next available promotional exam given for the rank for which they are
currently eligible. If the officer’s score would have resulted in a promotion if it had been
achieved on the exam(s) missed due to active military service, the officer must be promoted to
the next available vacancy in that rank. Seniority in rank will be established as of the date the
officer would have been promoted, as if he or she had not been on active military service. The
officer will also receive a lump sum payment in the amount of the difference between the pay
actually received and the promotional rank pay for the period of time since the officer retumed to
the Police Department from active duty. This provision is intended to comply with requirements
of USERRA, and to supersede the terms of Section 143.032(b) of the Texas Local Government
Code. This Agreement does not prevent the City from taking steps to comply with USERRA
under unique or special circumstances.

E. Special Leave.

1. In addition to leaves authorized above, the Chief may authorize an employee to be
absent without pay for personal reasons for periods not to exceed two hundred and forty (240)
hours. Leaves without pay in excess of two hundred and forty (240) hours and not exceeding
three hundred and sixty-five (365) days shall require approval of the City Manager.

2. The City Manager may authorize special leaves of absence with pay for any period or
periods not to exceed three hundred and sixty-five (365-days for the following purposes:
Attendance at college, university, or business school for the purpose of training in subjects
relating to the work of the employee and which will benefit the employee and the City service,
serving on a jury or attending a court as a witness; and for purposes other than the above that are
deemed beneficial to the City service.

3. The City Council, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, may grant leaves
of absence with or without pay in excess of the limitations above for the purposes of attending
extended courses of training at a recognized university or college and for other purposes that are
deemed beneficial to the City service.

F. Line of Duty Injury or Illness. No sick leave shall be charged for an injury or illness
sustained in the line of duty. Employees shall be paid injury leave in an amount not to exceed
their regular salary as provided by the state law for injuries occurring while in the course of
employment. The use of accrued sick leave may be granted to any officer at the discretion of the
Chief for job related illnesses or injuries after injury leave have been exhausted. Line of duty
illness shall be defined as an illness, which has been directly and substantially caused by the
duties of the position. In the event the Chief denies a request pursuant to this section, the officer
may appeal such denial in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days to the City Manager. The
City Manager shall render a decision on the appeal in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days
of receipt of the appeal. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and binding on the
parties and shall not be subject to appeal to a grievance, arbitration or any other body.
G. Administrative Leave. Assistant Chiefs and Commanders may receive administrative
leave time for work performed in excess of their regularly scheduled duties. Said leave time may
be granted at the discretion of the Chief, subject to scheduling and manpower contingencies that
may arise. Said administrative leave time shall, in no event, exceed that amount of time that
Assistant Chiefs and Commanders have accumulated in excess of their regularly scheduled work.

H. Leave Buy-Back. On August | of each year an employee may elect to sell back to the
City two (2) hours of vacation leave for every hour of vacation leave used during the following
twelve (12) month period not to exceed eighty (80) hours per fiscal year. Selling vacation leave
hours to the City under this provision shall be in lieu of any other option to vacation days under
this Agreement or any other City policy or practice. The City shall distribute funds in cash or as
contribution to deferred compensation or as otherwise directed by the employee. Any costs
incurred for the transfer of funds for distributions other than direct payment to the employee
shall be the responsibility of the employee.

I. Sick Leave Pool. Each police officer shall accumulate one hundred and twenty (120)
hours of sick leave with pay per calendar year. The sick leave pool will have a maximum balance
of eight thousand (8,000) hours. When the total number of sick leave pool hours drop below
three thousand two hundred (3,200) hours, eight (8) hours of sick leave with pay for each officer
shall become part of the sick leave pool, until the pool reaches its eight thousand (8,000) hour
limit, and any remaining hours shall continue to be credited to the individual officer. If an
employee does not have eight (8) hours of accrued sick leave, the employee shall be debited
eight (8) hours from compensatory time or vacation leave days, in that order. Upon completion
of probation, each officer shall have eight (8) hours of sick leave credited to the pool. No officer
shall be eligible to draw sick leave pool hours until eight (8) hours of his/her sick leave hours is
credited to the pool. The following requirements determine when sick leave pool hours may be
drawn:

1. Officers with four (4) years or less service may use pool hours after one hundred twenty
(120) hours of continuous non-job related illness or injury. The first one hundred twenty
(120) hours shall be charged to the officer's accumulated sick leave or vacation leave or,
if personal sick leave has been exhausted, to dock time.

2. All other officers may use pool hours after one hundred sixty (160) hours of continuous
non-job related illness or injury. Provided, however, in addition, before being entitled to
use hours, such an officer must first use all his/her accumulated personal sick leave in
excess of the amount payable upon termination.

3. No officer shall be permitted to use more than one thousand four hundred and forty
(1,440) pool hours for a single illness or injury.

4. Pool hours may not be used for injuries or illnesses sustained in the line of duty. Injuries

or illnesses sustained in the line of duty shall be compensated entirely under the terms of
Article 11 (Section F) of this Agreement relating to "Line of Duty Injury or Illness."

Page 43
5. The number of hours in the pool shall be solely for the benefit of officers with non-job
related injuries or physical or mental illnesses (including alcohol or drug related
problems) identified by a licensed medical physician that prohibits the officer from
returning to full time, part time or light duty employment, and such hours shall not revert
to the accumulated sick leave of individual employees.

6. Pool time may only be used for an illness or injury which is an Officer’s non-job related
injury or physical or mental illness (including alcohol and drug related problems),
identified by a licensed medical physician that prohibits the officer from retuming to full
time, part time or light duty employment. Incapacities due to elective procedures are not
eligible under this program; however, complications that develop as a result of the
elective procedure(s) may be considered eligible.

7, Requests for hours from the pool should be submitted when the need for assistance is
determined. Hours will not be granted on a retroactive basis.

8. Requests for hours from the pool must:

a. Be accompanied by a statement from a licensed practitioner that gives the
diagnosis, prognosis, and anticipated return to work date of the Officer.

b. Include a copy of the most current time and leave records information that reflects
leave balances as of the Officer’s last day physically on duty and the date the
required use of personal sick leave, as defined in this section, will be or was
exhausted.

c. Be submitted on the “Request for Sick leave Pool Hours” form.

9. The Chief of Police, or designee, shall facilitate a committee review of all requests for
hours from the pool. The committee shall include the Chief of Police or designee, the
Commander of the Depariment’s Office of Accountability or designee, and the
Association President or designee. The decision of the committee will be final and can
not be grieved. The Chief of Police or designee will provide written notification to the
employee of the award or denial of pool hours by the committee.

a. The committee will determine the amount of pool hours to be granted for the
request, based upon the information provided by the Officer. The committee will
deny requests for which the data provided is insufficient and/or does not meet the
requirements of this section.

b. The Chief of Police, or designee, may reconvene the committee for further
consideration should evidence become available that would have affected the
outcome of the committee’s decision.

10. If pool hours are used intermittently and an employee accrues vacation and sick leave
prior to all granted pool hours being used, the Officer must use accrued leave prior to
resuming use of pool hours. Hours granted under this program do not extend or increase
time limits provided under any other policy (ie. Limited Duty & Reasonable
Accommodation, Family and Medical Leave Act, etc.)

11. Officers leaving employment with the City are not entitled to payment of unused pool
hours. Additionally, the estate of a deceased Officer is not entitled to payment of unused
hours.

12. Documentation provided in association with a request for hours from the pool will be
maintained in a confidential manner, as allowed by law.

J. Other Leave Time Policies. The City shall maintain all other leave time policies affecting
police officers currently in effect and not otherwise altered by provisions of this contract.

K. Bereavement Leave. Upon the employee’s request due to the death of an immediate
family member, three (3) duty days of bereavement leave shall be granted. Immediate family
members shall include the employee’s parents, spouse, children, brothers, sisters, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, brothers-in-law, and sisters-in-law, employee’s or spouse’s grandparents and
grandchild.

L. Funeral Benefit. The City Manager shall approve up to $16,000 documented funeral
expenses for employees who lose their lives in the course and scope of employment.

ARTICLE 12 - PERSONNEL PRACTICES

A. Interchangeable Use of Police Officers and Senior Police Officers. Senior Police
Officers and Police Officers may be freely utilized interchangeably in positions presently staffed
by either classification in the various divisions with the following exceptions where only Senior
Police Officers may be permanently assigned:

1. Criminal Investigation Division

2. Division of Professional Standards
3. Special Services Division

4. Organized Crime Unit, and

5. Training Division

The Chief of Police shall not assign any officer to the position of Field Training Officer who has
less than three (3) years of service.

In the event of exigent circumstances, the Chief of Police may assign an employee from the rank
of police officer to work in one (1) of the Senior Police Officer only positions for a period not to

[Page 45
exceed ninety (90) calendar days during a calendar year. This period may be extended for one (1)
additional ninety (90) calendar day period.

B. Disability.

1. A disability shall be defined as a physical injury or illness which prevents an officer
from fully performing assigned duties in all major divisions of the Department.

2. A permanent disability shall be defined as an injury or illness which disables an
officer to the extent that it cannot be said in reasonable medical probability that the officer will
be able to return to full duties within one (1) calendar year.

3. The Chief may at any time require a medical examination to determine if an officer is
permanently disabled. When it is determined that an officer is permanently disabled, the Chief
shall be entitled to terminate or retire the officer, and whichever is applicable. In the event the
Chief determines, after consultation with the City Physician, that the officer is permanently
unable to perform his or her job duties, he may institute immediate termination or retirement if
applicable. An officer may call for further examination by a board of three (3) physicians. One
such physician shall be appointed by the City, one (1) by the officer and the third by agreement
of said physicians. The officer and the City shall pay their own appointed physicians and the
parties shall share equally in the cost of the third physician. The majority finding of the three (3)
physicians as to whether a permanent disability exists shall be final and non-appealable.

4. Upon termination or retirement for permanent disability, the officer shall be entitled
to a lump sum payment for all his/her accumulated personal sick leave, but shal! not be entitled
to use or be compensated for any pool hours.

5. Upon any employee's being absent from duty for ninety (90) working days as a result
of a single illness or injury, the Chief shall immediately require the employee to submit to a
medical examination to determine whether the employee is permanently disabled, such
determination to be made in accordance with the procedures in the preceding paragraph.

6. An officer who has previously been declared permanently disabled may be eligible
for re-appointment to the service by the Chief upon certification by the City Physician that he or
she recovered from the disability and is able to perform full duties. Provided, however, after two
(2) years from the date of such disability the employee shall no longer be eligible for re-
appointment. In the event the Chief denies a request for reappointment pursuant to this section,
the officer may appeal such denial in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days to the City
Manager. The City Manager shall render a decision on the appeal in writing within fourteen (14)
calendar days of receipt of the appeal. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and
binding on the parties and shall not be subject to appeal to a grievance, arbitration or any other
body.

C. Civil Service Internal Investigations. The Civil Service Commission shall not conduct

investigations of internal affairs within the Police Department. The term "investigation" means
investigations of alleged misconduct of one (1) or more police officers by the internal

|Page 46
investigation unit of the Police Department. It is agreed that such internal investigations shall be
the duty and responsibility of the Chief of Police. This specific alteration of Chapter 143 is
authorized by Chapter 174.

D. Civil Service Commission Records. All rules, opinions, directives, decisions, and orders
issued by the Civil Service Commission shall be preserved in written minutes. Such actions need
not be copied verbatim in the minutes; it shall be sufficient to accurately summarize such actions.
The Chairman or, in his/her absence, the Vice-Chairman of the Commission shall sign the
minutes; the signatures of the concurring members on any action shall not be required. The
Commission may, if it desires, cause any rules, decisions, directives, or orders to be reduced to
writing, apart from the minutes. All such written records of the Commission shall be public
records.

E. Notice of Shift Change. The Chief of Police shall post the monthly shift change schedule
at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the beginning of said shift change. This requirement shall
not limit the right of the Chief of Police to reassign employees on short notice to other shifts,
based upon scheduling and manpower contingencies that may arise.

Recognizing that shift changes, transfers and job assignments may require the assessment
of a number of factors, the Chief of Police maintains the right to make all shift changes, transfers
and job assignments in accordance with its determination of what is in the best interest of the
Department. The Chief of Police shall adopt and provide a copy of the departmental transfer
procedure to each employee.

Except in the case of an emergency, or unless operational circumstances require
otherwise, job vacancies will be brought to the attention of employees so that those interested in
a vacant position may express their interest to the supervisor who is responsible for selection.
Notice of vacant positions, skills required, and process to be used to make the selection will be
posted on the department bulletin boards in the form of a staff memorandum or e-mailed to all
employees. The Chief of Police shall make a reasonable effort to assure that all eligible
employees under his/her command are aware of the vacancy and the process to be used to make
the selection. Employees who are interested in a vacant position should contact the appropriate
supervisor in writing. Before the vacancy is filled, employees will be allowed a reasonable
amount of time to apply. Skills, knowledge, abilities, training, previous experience and seniority
shall be among the factors considered in the policy adopted by the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police shall post the results of his/her decision on the filling of any job vacancy.

Although not subject to the grievance procedure, should an employee feel that a
misapplication of this provision in regards to shift changes, transfers or job assignments has
occurred, he or she may file an informational complaint with the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police shall meet personally with the employee within thirty (30) calendar days of the complaint
being filed.

Although not subject to the grievance procedure, should the Association feel that there

has been a misapplication of this provision in regards to the policy or process on shift changes,
transfers or job assignments, the Association may file an informational complaint with the Chief

[Page 47
of Police. The Chief of Police shall meet personally with the Association and respond in writing
to all Association informational complaints within thirty (30) calendar days of the complaint
being filed.

F. Wearing of Uniform on Off-Duty Security Jobs. An “off-duty security job” shall be
defined as off-duty employment, the primary purpose of which is to utilize, or to potentially
utilize, the training and police powers of the Corpus Christi police officer. The Chief may at
his/her discretion; require a police officer working an off-duty security job to wear a police
uniform during his/her first (1") year of employment. After the first (1) year of employment, the
Chief may require a police officer working an off-duty security job to wear a police uniform
where the circumstances clearly demonstrate that by said officer’s failure to wear a uniform; he
would present a danger to the public, the secondary employer, and the efficiency of the Police
Department. The criteria that the Chief shall consider in determining whether or not a danger
exists include:

1, The secondary job assignment;

2. The officer's personnel evaluations and experience;

3. The officer's prior disciplinary record; and

4. The presence or absence of commendations and awards.

G. Entrance Examinations. Entrance examinations may be administered at any time or
location to qualified groups or individual applicants. Names placed on the eligibility list for
entrance appointments shall remain on that list for three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar
days from the date of the written examination. The eligibility list shall exist continually as names
are added and deleted. No applicant shall be permitted to take an entrance exam more than once
for an academy class. The oral interview shall be graded and such grade shall be computed into
the final score.

H. Alternate Hiring Process.

(a) The City and the Association shall make a good faith effort to develop an alternate
hiring process to be entered into between the City and other Texas cities providing for lateral
transfer of officers from one city to another without restricting a transferred officer to entry-level
rank. Any such agreement may be made by the Police Chief subject to approval of the
Association's Executive Board, and shall be written and signed by the Chief of Police and no less
than three (3) members of the Executive Board.

(b) The Chief, without regard to the existence of or requirement for any eligibility list for
beginning positions in the Department, may appoint applicants to beginning positions in
accordance with this alternate hiring process. Each applicant must (1) have a current TCOLE
peace officer intermediate certification; (2) be employed or have been employed for at least three
(3) continuous years as police officer by an incorporated Texas city, as a deputy sheriff in any
Texas County of at least 120,000 population according to the most recent U.S. Census, or by the

[Page 48
Texas Department of Public Safety; and (3) actively worked as such within the three hundred
and sixty-five (365) calendar day period preceding his/her application.

(c) Each applicant must successfully complete entry requirements, including a medical
examination, a physical fitness examination, a written proficiency examination to identify
writing skills and knowledge of Texas law, a background investigation {to include a polygraph),
a drug test, a psychological examination, a panel interview (panel to be appointed by the Chief)
and any other current eligibility requirements deemed appropriate by the Chief.

(d) Applicants who are appointed must successfully complete an academy specifically
designed for applicants who are hired in accordance with this alternate hiring process. The Chief,
in his/her sole discretion, may deny the application of any applicant at any time. Such decision
shall not be appealed to arbitration, to the Commission or to any Court and shall not be subject to
the grievance procedure in this contract.

{e) The beginning salary of officers appointed under this alternate hiring process shall be
equal to the thirty (30) month Police Officer salary. These officers shall become eligible to take
the Senior Police Officer exam thirty (30) months after appointment. These officers shall be
treated as new employees for all other purposes, including seniority, benefits and eligibility for
promotion.

() Officers hired under this alternate hiring process shall serve a one hundred and eighty
(180) calendar day probationary period beginning with completion of the academy and may be
discharged during this period at the discretion of the Chief, without appeal to arbitration, to the
Commission or to any Court and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure in this contract.

(g) The Association, recognizing the City’s need for flexibility in the hiring process,
hereby agrees to the deviations from Chapter 143 hiring procedures and this Article supersedes
them.

I. Reinstatement

The Chief, at his/her sole discretion, may rehire police officers who terminate their
employment with the City of Corpus Christi and request in writing to be reinstated within
eighteen (18) months. The rehired officer shall be required to enter at the rank of police officer
regardless of the rank they held when they terminated their employment. The rehired officer
shall be allowed to retain all seniority they held prior to terminating their employment; however,
the rehired officer must wait eighteen (18) months to be eligible to take the senior officer
examination. If rehired, the officer shall not be required to take the civil service entrance
examination or to re-enter the basic academy. For example, a rehired officer who had five (5)
years of seniority when they terminated their employment would be rehired at PO7 at the forty-
two (42) month pay step. When a rehired (reinstated) officer passes the senior officer
examination, he or she shall retain afl seniority he or she had as a senior officer prior to
terminating their employment. For example, if an officer had five (5) years of service in the rank
of senior officer when he or she terminated their employment, the officer shall be credited with
five (5) years of seniority as a senior officer when they pass the senior officer examination after

{Page 49
being rehired (reinstated), and shall be paid as a five (5) year senior officer. However, a rehired
(reinstated) officer who makes senior officer again shail serve for a period of two (2) continuous
years before being eligible to take the lieutenant’s examination. The Chief shall have the right to
require a rehired officer to successfully complete a designated course of in-service training and
to impose a one hundred and eighty (180) day probationary period from the date of rehire during
which the officer may be discharged at the discretion of the Chief without appeal to arbitration,
to the Commission, or to any court and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure in this
agreement.]

J, Mandatory Random Drug Testing. The City and the Association agree that police
officers may be called upon in hazardous situations without warning, and that it is imperative to
the interest of police officers and the public to ensure that police officers are not substance
impaired. In order to further their joint interest in protecting police officers and the public, the
City and the Association agree to mandatory random drug testing described in this section.
Thirty percent (30%) of police officers of all ranks shall be mandatory random drug tested during
each calendar year on a fair and impartial statistical basis as provided in the Police Department's
Drug and Alcohol Policy. The fair and impartial statistical basis (in which each police officer has
an equal chance of being selected) shall be by a non-discriminatory computerized program
operated and certified as non-discriminatory by an independent firm hired by the City, and the
employee shall be tested upon being selected by the computer. The City shall notify the officer
as to whether the test was post-accident, random or based upon reasonable suspicion.

For the purposes of this section:

A. “drug testing” shall be defined as the compulsory production and submission of urine
by an officer for chemical analysis to detect the presence of prohibited drug usage.

B. “random drug testing” shall mean drug testing of individuals selected by the method
described in the prior paragraph.

C. “reasonable suspicion” shall be defined as a judgment/conclusion that a person is
unable to safely and/or effectively perform their duties due to the suspected influence of drugs,
alcohol, or inhalants. Reasonable suspicion is based on specific, observable facts that an officer
may be under the influence of drugs, alcohol, or inhalants. Reasonable suspicion testing is not
limited by this article, except to the extent that any urine testing utilized shall be in accordance
with the lab testing protocol below. Reasonable suspicion testing may involve urine or blood as
determined under existing legal standards.

An employee’s mandatory random drug test results and related collection and diagnostic
information shall be disclosed to the City to administer and enforce the Police Department’s
Alcohol and Drug Policy and this Collective Bargaining Agreement. The City and the
Association otherwise regard an employee’s mandatory random drug test results and related
collection and diagnostic information as confidential.

The City and the Association have a mutual interest in ensuring that drug impaired
employees do not perform law enforcement duties. The City and the Association agree that the

[Page 50
purpose of the mandatory random drug testing is not to punish an employee who has not violated
the Police Department’s Drug and Alcohol Policy. The City and the Association are committed
to the principal that the mandatory random drug testing for employees is designed and will be
administered to result in disciplinary action only against those officers who have violated the
Police Department Drug and Alcohol Policy.

The City has developed a Police Department Drug and Alcohol Policy with procedures
and protocols, which follow the requirements of SAMHSA/CAP FUDTP. The section of the
Police Department Drug and Alcohol Policy dealing with mandatory random drug testing and the
consequences thereof is subject to amendment by the City only as the City determines is
necessary to follow the requirements of SAMHSA/CAP FUDTP. A grievance regarding the
application, interpretation or enforcement of the language in this section is subject to mandatory
arbitration. The sample for testing shall be a split sample. The collector shall inform the officer
of the size of the required sample, and shall use a chain of custody process to split, label and
send the sample, which shall be forwarded on the same day as the sample is taken. The City shall
require any laboratory selected for collecting samples, to conduct a background investigation on
those laboratory personnel involved in the collecting or handling an unsealed sample. The City is
permitted to and does utilize a different lab for steroid testing. In addition, the City shall require
any laboratory selected for collecting samples to use only employees who have not been arrested
by members of the Corpus Christi Police Department or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
crime involving dishonest conduct or possession of illegal drugs to be involved in the collecting
or handling of an unsealed sample collected from a Corpus Christ Police Officer. Test results
shall be inadmissible in any administrative disciplinary hearing if it is determined that the
laboratory collecting samples has failed to conduct a background investigation on the laboratory
personnel involved in collecting or handling the unsealed sample which resulted in a positive test
result. The burden of showing that a background investigation was not conducted shall be on the
party seeking to have the test results excluded from the administrative hearing. The City shall use
only a SAMHSA/CAP FUDTP certified laboratory for mandatory random drug testing and shall
require that such laboratory comply with the requirements of SAMHSA/CAP FUDTP. The
results of the test or tests shall be sent by the laboratory to the Medical Review Officer via
express mail service. The MRO may act separately on test results from each lab. The City shall
allow the Association input into the Request For Proposal (RFP) on the selection of the Medical
Review Officer. The test shall be a Police Department ten (10) panel test as set out in the Police
Department Drug and Alcohol Policy. The specimens collected for testing shall be maintained in
a secured area until picked up by the courier. The City shall use only a Medical Review Officer
(MRO) for the City of Corpus Christi who is a licensed physician and who is certified as a
Medical Review Officer by the American Association of Medical Review Officers.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to abolish the existing authority and practice of
the City to conduct drug test for:

1. Pre-employment
2. Pre-assignment for Vice, Narcotics, Organized Crime or Emergency Reaction Units

or as a dispatcher or clerk in the Communications Division or as a Bomb Technician
or as a member of the Peer Support team.
3. Reasonable suspicion.

4. On retum to duty after an absence of thirty (30) calendar days or more.
5. Post - accident

6. Post - firearm discharge

Such test will be conducted under the same laboratory processes and protocols as
mandatory random testing.

K. Layoffs, Recalls and Reductions in Force. Layoffs, recalls and reductions in force shall
be pursuant to Section 143.085.

L. Temporary Duties_in Higher Classification. A Senior Police Officer temporarily
performing the duties of a Lieutenant or a Lieutenant temporarily performing the duties of a
Captain shall not be temporarily appointed or made acting Lieutenant or Captain, but shall be
paid for hours worked in the higher classification pursuant to Chapter 143.038, Texas Local
Government Code.

M. Physical Fitness.

1, The Chief of Police and the Association may mutually agree in writing to adopt a
physical fitness assessment model, adjusted for age and gender.

2. The City at its sole discretion may offer incentives, either in pay or leave time, if the
Association mutually agrees in writing.

3. The City agrees to establish a police officer wellness program. This program will also
include distribution of nutrition and fitness information during in-service training.

ARTICLE 13 - PROMOTIONS

A. Posting and Administration of Promotional Examinations. A listing of materials from
which promotional examination questions are taken shall be posted annually each January for
examinations administered within the three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar day period
beginning the following April. The City shall post the date of the examination and a listing of the
above materials no later than sixty (60) calendar days prior to an affected examination.

Study materials will be available at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to an examination.
No competitor for an exam may receive from an authorized or unauthorized person any part of a
promotional examination for unfair personal gain or advantage.

With respect to vacancies in the ranks of Lieutenant and Captain, where no current
eligibility roster exists, the City shall have one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days from the

|Page 52
date of vacancy to complete the administration of written and Assessment Center examinations
and post an eligibility roster. The Chief shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the posting of a
Lieutenant or Captain eligibility roster to review the candidates and select an appointee, even if
posting should for some reason occur more than one hundred and twenty (120) calendar days
from the date of vacancy. For the purposes of this agreement, the term “vacancy” shall occur
whenever no person holds the position or a person previously holding the position is permanently
disqualified from maintaining the position. A vacancy does not occur during the tendency of a
person’s appeal of a suspension, indefinite suspension or demotion.

B. Promotional Examination Corrections, The Civil Service Director shall have authority to
recommend to the Civil Service Commission changes to entrance, or promotional examination
questions where clerical errors in compiling the test questions have been discovered or where a
question arises as to general accuracy.

C. Senior Police Officer's Proficiency Examination.

Police officers who have sixty (60) months of service in the Corpus Christi Police
Department after commissioning as a police officer and possess either an Intermediate Certificate
from TCOLE or at least sixty (60) hours of college credit from an accredited college or
university shall be eligible to take an individual pass-fail written proficiency examination to
qualify for immediate advancement to the rank of Senior Officer. Proficiency examinations shall
be administered on a semi-annual basis. One (1) test shal! be given within one (1) month of each
academy becoming eligible. If only one (1) academy is eligible in any given year, the second
test shall be given within six (6) months of the last test if there are any eligible officers. Officers
shall advance only after successfully passing the examination by correctly answering at least
seventy percent (70%) of all questions provided in the test. The results, of the proficiency test,
with the exception of fraud, shall not be appealable to the Civil Service Commission.

D. After_Acquired_Educational_Requirement_for Lieutenants Promoted to Captain.
Lieutenants promoted to Captain who do not have a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college
or university shall be required to obtain a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or
university within forty-eight (48) calendar months of their promotion. This section does not
apply to employees promoted to Captain prior to April 22, 2003. An employee who fails to
obtain the required bachelor’s degree shall be demoted to Lieutenant. An employee so demoted
shall have no right to prior notice, a statement of charges, or to file a grievance or to appeal the
demotion, and the Commission shall have no jurisdiction, power, or authority to investigate or
review such demotion or to alter the terms of such demotion. Upon demotion from the Captain
classification, an employee shall resume the competitive classification of Lieutenant from which
he was promoted and his/her salary shall be in accordance with said competitive classification
with service time credited as continuous time in that competitive classification and with his/her
salary increases to which he would have been automatically entitled had he continuously
remained in said competitive classification. When an employee is demoted, the demoted
employee shall not “bump” another employee who is in the competitive rank of Lieutenant.

E. Appointment of Assistant Chiefs, and Commanders. All promotions to the classifications
of Assistant Chief or Police Commander shall be exempt from competitive examinations, and

}Page 53
instead shall be made by appointment by the Chief. The appointment shall be within the
discretion of the Chief, provided that the Chief shall promote the employees from the classifi-
cations specified elsewhere in this agreement. Captains appointed to Commander after May 1,
2003, who do not have a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university, shall be
required to obtain a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university within forty-eight
(48) months calendar months of appointment by the chief. Lieutenants appointed to Commander
after January 30, 2007 who do not have a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or
university shall be required to obtain a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university
within forty-eight (48) calendar months of appointment by the chief. Persons who fail to obtain
the required bachelor’s degree shall be removed from the appointed position by the chief.
Captains or Commanders appointed to Assistant Chief after May 1, 2003, who do not have a
master’s degree from an accredited college or university, shall be required to obtain a master’s
degree from an accredited college or university within sixty (60) calendar months of appointment
by the Chief. Captains or Commanders appointed to Assistant Chief after July 31, 2005 who do
not have a master’s degree from an accredited college or university shall be required to obtain a
master’s degree from an accredited college or university within forty-eight (48) calendar months
of appointment by the Chief. Lieutenants appointed to Assistant Chief after January 30, 2007
who do not have a master’s degree from an accredited college or university shall be required to
obtain a master’s degree from an accredited college or university within forty-eight (48) calendar
months of appointment by the Chief. Persons who fail to obtain the required master’s degree
shall be removed from the appointed position by the Chief. Employees appointed to the positions
of Assistant Chief or Police Commander under the provisions set out herein may be demoted
from said position at the discretion of the Chief. An employee so demoted shall have no right to
prior notice, a statement of charges, or to file a grievance or to appeal the demotion, and the
Commission shall have no jurisdiction, power, or authority to investigate or review such
demotion or to alter the terms of such demotion. Upon demotion from such an appointed
classification, an employee shall resume the competitive classification from which he or she was
appointed and his/her salary shall be in accordance with said competitive classification with
service time credited as continuous time in that competitive classification and with all salary
increases to which he or she would have been automatically entitled had he or she continuously
remained in said competitive classification. When an employee is demoted in rank from an
appointed classification due to a reduction in force, the demoted employee shall not “bump”
another employee who is in a competitive rank.

F. Probationary Period for Lieutenants and Captains. Employees promoted to the rank of
Lieutenant or Captain may be demoted at the discretion of the Chief, without appeal to the
Commission at any time during the three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar day period
subsequent to being so promoted. An employee so demoted shall have no right to prior notice, a
statement of charges, or to file a grievance or to appeal the demotion, and the Commission shall
have no jurisdiction, power, or authority to investigate or review such demotion or to alter the
terms of such demotion.

G. Filling Vacancies Below Commander. Upon written request by the Police Chief for a
person to fill a vacancy in any classification below the rank of Commander, the Commission
shall certify to the Police Chief the names of the three (3) persons on the eligibility list having
the highest grades for the position to be filled, and the Police Chief may select any one (1) of the

34

age
three (3) persons so certified. The Police Chief need not state in writing his/her reason for
selection or rejection of any of the three (3) persons certified by the Commission. In the event a
person rejected desires to appeal the action of the Police Chief, such appeal shall be to an arbitra-
tor selected as specified in paragraph F of Article 7, and there shall be no appeal to the Civil
Service Commission. The person rejected who desires to appeal the action of the Police Chief is
charged with the burden of proof of showing that the rejection was for some reason other than
the officer's ability to perform at the higher rank. The arbitrator may overturn the decision of the
Chief. The question of rejection on the part of the Police Chief shall be determined by the
arbitrator. To the extent this paragraph alters any provision of Chapter 143, Chapter 143 is so
altered, and it is mutually so agreed.

H. Eligibility for Promotion. The following rank, service, and educational or certification
levels shall be required of all officers participating in the promotional procedure as set forth in
this contract.

 

 

 

 

Current Rank Service Testing
Rank Sought Requirements Requirements
Police Officer | Senior Police | 5 years prior to exam and possess either an Written
Officer Intermediate certificate or 60 hours of Proficiency Exam
credit from an accredited
college/university.
Senior Police | Lieutenant 2 years of service in rank immediately Promotional Exam
Officer prior to exam and possess either an and Assessment
Intermediate certificate or 60 hours of Center
credit from an accredited
college/university.
Lieutenant Captain 2 years service in rank immediately prior | Promotional Exam
to exam and a Bachelors Degree from an and Assessment
accredited college/university within 48 Center
months of appointment to Captain.
Lieutenant Commander | 2 years service in rank immediately prior None

to appointment and a Bachelors Degree
from an accredited college/university
within 48 months of appointment to

 

Commander.
Lieutenant Assistant 5 years service in rank immediately prior None
Chief to appointment and a Masters degree from

an accredited college/university within 48
months of appointment to Assistant Chief.

 

Captain Commander No minimum service requirement. A None
Bachelors degree from an accredited
college/university within 48 months of

 

 

 

appointment to Commander.
Captain or Assistant No minimum service requirement. A
Commander Chief Masters degree from an accredited

 

 

 

college/university within 48 months of

 

 

 

|Page 55
I | appointment to Assistant Chief. I

I. Promotional Procedures. The promotional examination procedure for the classification
of Lieutenant and Captain shall consist of two (2) parts as follows:

1, Written Examination - Shall consist of questions relating to the specific duties of the
position to be filled. The written examination shall have no specific failing score but will provide
a ranking of participants from high to low score. In the event that written examination scores are
the same, the earliest time for submitting the examination form to the test administrator for
grading shall determine respective standing. Only the highest ten (10) scorers from the Captain’s
written examination shall be allowed to continue on to the next phase of the examination process.
Only the highest fifteen (15) scorers from the Lieutenant's written examination shall be allowed
to continue on to the next phase of the examination process (Assessment Center).

The City will engage an independent consultant firm to professionally develop the written
examination questions after consultation with the Human Resources Department. Such firm shall
deliver the examination questions in a sealed and secured manner confidentially to the Human
Resources Department, which will maintain them confidential, in a safe and secure manner.
Under no circumstances shall the examination questions be taken out from under the confidential
supervision and control of the Human Resources Department. If any of the eligible ten (10)
candidates for Captains or the eligible fifteen (15) candidates for Lieutenant has an indefinite
suspension on appeal the City may add an additional candidate for each such pending appeal to
the Assessment Candidate Pool.

2. Assessment Center Examination - Shall consist of:

Six (6) certified police officers from outside the Police Department holding comparable
or higher positions in a Police Department operating in a city of 100,000 or more population
shall be selected to serve as assessors. All Assessors may be chosen by the Association and must
have received authorization to participate by his/her respective Department. One of the six (6)
assessors may be chosen from out of state. The Chief shall have the right to review the list of
assessors and may strike no more than three (3) names from the list. If the Chief exercises the
right to strike, he must provide a replacement(s) within five (5) calendar days of reviewing the
list. The identification of the assessors shall be keep confidential. The Association President or
Designee who develops the assessor list must not be a candidate for the promotional exam for
which the list of assessors has been developed.

The assessment center examination date(s) will be posted on the same day the written test
announcement is posted. On the day or days of the promotional assessment center the candidates
may participate in the assessment process in lieu of duty. Assessors shal! be trained in the
methods to be used in administering the test for a minimum of eight (8) hours. All candidates
will be given the opportunity to attend a classroom orientation period concerning the assessment
center process. The orientation will include general information concerning the exercises they
will be taking during the assessment process. The independent consultant shall develop at least
three (3) exercises which he/she determines adequately assess measurable dimensions of the job
analysis.

 
Feedback shall be provided to cach candidate in a “feedback” session by the assessment
center coordinators. The purpose of this session will be to provide each candidate with his/her
score, what areas he/she excelled in, what areas he/she did poorly in, and what they might do to
improve their performance in the future. The scores of the assessment center shall count sixty
percent (60%) of the combined score and the written examination scores shall count forty percent
(40%) of the combined scores to determine the final ranking when one (1) point for each year of
service is added up to a total of ten (10) points maximum.

J. Eligibility List. Within forty-eight (48) hours of the completion, excluding weekends and
holidays, of the Assessment Center Examination, an eligibility list shall be prepared and posted
with the respective ranking of all applicants based on the following weights:

 

 

 

 

(1) Written Examination 40%
(2) Assessment Center Examination 60%
100%

 

Points on Lieutenant’s Examination

 

1 point for each year of service as a| 10 points
commissioned officer with the department up
to a maximum of 10 points

 

110 Maximum Points

 

Points on Captain’s Examination

 

1 point for each year in rank up to a maximum | 5 points
of 5 points

 

 

 

105 Maximum Points

 

The results of the Assessment Center shall be binding for three hundred and sixty-five
(365) calendar days and with the exception of fraud, shall not be appealable to the Civil Service
Commission or arbitration.

K. Contract Training for Lieutenants. As part of the New Lieutenant Training Program,
employees newly-promoted to the rank of Lieutenant will be required to attend one four (4) hour
contract training session relating to specific provisions of the current Collective Bargaining
Agreement between the City of Corpus and the Corpus Christi Police Officers Association. The
training session will be sponsored by the Association and will be held at a place designated by
the Association.

L. Grievances or Suits Claiming Right to Promotion. Any grievance or suit, known or
unknown, claiming a right to promotion shall be filed in compliance with this Agreement no later
than twenty (20) calendar days after the expiration of the eligibility list which is the subject of
such grievance or suit. In the event of an award by an arbitrator or court in such a proceeding, no
other person with a ranking on any previously expired eligibility list pertaining to any rank, at

[Page 57
the time of such judgment or award, shall ever be entitled to promotion, back pay, enhanced
seniority, or any other relief.

M. Chapter 143 Applicability. No Portion of Chapter 143 is applicable to the promotional
process for assistant chief, commander, captain or lieutenant with the exception of Sections
143.032(h), (i), and 143.034 and 143.028(c).

N. Nepotism.

1. Promotions. This section shall take precedence over any other provisions of this
Article or Agreement. If a relative of the Chief is a candidate for lieutenant or captain and
qualifies by written examination to continue with the assessment center examination, the Chief
shall not participate in the promotional process or in making of any appointment from the list
established there from and the City Manager shall exercise all of the contractual and statutory
authority of the Chief with respect to said process and appointments. If the Chief's relative is
promoted, the Chief shall not participate in the probationary review of the relative under Section
E of this Article, and the City Manager shall exercise all of the Chief’s authority under Section E
and any related statutory provision. The Chief shall not participate in any other action, which
would affect the relative’s promotion or probationary review, and the City Manager shall
exercise all contractual and statutory authority, which the Chief would otherwise exercise in
connection with any such action. “Relative” is a person related to the Chief within a degree
described by Section 573.002, Government Code.

2. Transfers. This section shall take precedence over any other provisions of this Article
or Agreement. If a relative of the Chief requests an inter-divisional personnel transfer, the Chief
shall not participate in the decision-making process or in making any transfer. The City Manager
pursuant to General Rules Manual 1.12 shall exercise all of the contractual and statutory
authority of the Chief with respect to said transfer. “Relative” is a person related to the Chief
within a degree described by Section 573.002, Government Code.

Q. The final score shall be carried forward until a decimal place determines their ranking on
the eligibility list.

P. Time served _as_an acting or temporary Lieutenant _between December_1, 2006 and
December 10, 2010. For the sole purpose of moving beyond the eighteen (18) month step,
officers holding the rank of Lieutenant who were appointed between December 1, 2006 and
December 10, 2010 shall be credited for time served as an acting or temporary Lieutenant. This
section shall not be appealed to arbitration, to the Commission or to any Court and shall not be
subject to the grievance procedure in this contract.

 

ARTICLE 14 - EMPLOYEE MANAGEMENT RELATIONS

A. Labor Relations Committee, The City and the Association, having recognized that
cooperation between management and employees is indispensable to the accomplishment of
sound and harmonious labor relations shall jointly maintain and support a labor relations
committee. The labor-management committee shall consider, discuss and recommend to the

[Page 58
Chief any problems pertaining to the employment conditions of employees. Matters subject to
the grievance procedure shall not be appropriate items for consideration by the labor-
management committee. The labor management committee shall consist of the following: {1)
Director of Human Resources or his/her designee; (2) The Chief or his/her designee, who shall
be a police officer within the Police Department; (3) the Association President or his/her
designee, who shall be a police officer from the Police Department from the Association; (4) the
Association Vice-President or his/her designee, who shall be a police officer from within the
Police Department from the Association; and (5) a member of the Association designated by the
President who must be a police officer within the department. There shall be a written agenda of
matters to be discussed. Officers desiring items placed on the written agenda shall forward the
matter in writing to the Office of the Chief of Police through the President of the Association.
The labor- management committee shall meet bi-monthly unless mutually agreed otherwise, and
a written summary report of the meeting shall be generated within thirty (30) calendar days
subsequent to the meeting.

B. Legal Defense. The City will provide a legal defense to any police officer in a civil
lawsuit, on account of any action taken by such police officer while acting within the course and
scope of the police officer's employment for the City of Corpus Christi. The City, by conducting
or participating in the employee’s defense, does not assume any obligation or liability not
otherwise imposed by law, and does not expressly or impliedly waive an immunity or defense,
which is available to the City. The City need not assume any obligation not otherwise imposed
by law for any judgment which is rendered against an employee who committed intentional acts,
was grossly negligent, or reckless.

1. The police officer shall notify the City of any claim being made against such police
officer not later than thirty (30) calendar days from that date that such police officer received
notice of such claim, and shall request the City to assume the defense of the police officer
regarding such claim. The City may require that such request be made in writing.

2. If suit is brought against such police officer, such police officer shall immediately
forward to the City Attorney every demand, notice, summons or other process received by him.

3. Such police officer shall cooperate with the City, and, upon the City's request, shall
assist the City in arriving at settlement agreements, and the conduct of suits, and in enforcing any
rights of contribution or indemnity against any person or organization who may be liable for all
or part of such damages, and shall attend all hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving
evidence and obtaining the attendance of witnesses.

4. If the City Attorney undertakes to represent the employee rather than provide private
counsel, he or she shail disclose to the employee any conflicts of interest between the employee
and the City in the civil action. If the employee chooses not to waive the conflict of interest, the
City shall retain qualified private counsel.
ARTICLE 15 - IMPASSE PROCEDURES

Negotiations for a new contract shall commence in accordance with Chapter 174. If
impasse should be reached as defined in Chapter 174, either party may request mediation, and
upon such request, the parties shall immediately proceed to choose one mediator as provided
herein. The function and powers of the mediator shall be as specified in Section 174.151. The
mediation shall extend for fourteen (14) calendar days.

If no agreement is reached through mediation, upon request of either party, the parties
shall submit the dispute to one (1) Fact finder, chosen as provided herein. The Fact finder shall
conduct a full and fair hearing. By agreement the parties may submit an issue or issues to the
Fact finder. If no agreement is reached, each party shall be entitled to submit four (4) proposals
to the Fact finder, each proposal on a distinct topic. For example, each of these constitutes a
distinct topic: salary, dependent health insurance coverage, promotional procedures, and political
activities. Each party may submit its four (4) proposals and its alternatives to the other party’s
proposals. The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. After
hearing all evidence offered by the parties, and any evidence requested independently by the Fact
finder, the Fact finder shall render a written decision making findings of fact and
recommendations as to all matters in dispute. In the opinion, the Fact finder shall state his/her
teasons for his/her findings of fact and recommendations. In rendering such findings and
recommendations, the Fact finder shall exercise his/her independent judgment and shall not
attempt to “split the difference.”

In making the findings of fact and recommendations, the Fact finder shall consider the
following evidence submitted to him by the parties or obtained at his/her direction: the overall
compensation in the current contract including direct salary and fringe benefits; the income
available to the City and demands on that income; a comparison of wages, hours, and conditions
of employment of Corpus Christi police officers with the wages, hours, and conditions of
employment of other public and private employees performing similar services and with other
employees generally in public and private employment in comparable communities and in
Corpus Christi; the hazards of employment, physical, educational, and mental qualifications, job
training and skills required of a Corpus Christi police officer; the cost of living in Corpus Christi
relative to other communities; the rate of increase in the cost of living for the preceding twelve
(12) month period using localized data to the fullest extent feasible; and any current national or
state policies or guidelines with respect to compensation.

The selection of the mediator and the Fact finder shall occur as follows. When either
party requests mediation or fact-finding, the parties may agree to choose any mediator or Fact
finder or method of choosing it. If no agreement occurs within five (5) days from the request, the
parties shall request a list of seven (7) neutrals from the American Arbitration Association
(AAA). Upon receiving the list, the parties shall select the Mediator or Fact finder by alternately
striking names. The request to AAA shall state the dates on which the neutrals must be available.
The mediator and the Fact finder shall be selected within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of
the list from the AAA. The fee and expenses of the mediator and the Fact finder shall be split
equally between the City and the Association. All other expenses, including witness fees, shall
be paid by the party incurring the expense or calling the witness.
If, within seven (7) calendar days after fact-finding, the parties have failed to agree to a
contract, the major, unresolved issues shall be submitted to the qualified voters of Corpus Christi
in a referendum election according to the following procedure. The election shall be held on the
first date permissible under state law. By agreement the parties may submit any issue or issues to
the voters. If no such agreement is reached, then each party shall be entitled to submit two (2)
issues to the voters, each issue on one (1) distinct topic. For example, each of these constitutes a
distinct issue: salary, dependent health insurance coverage, promotional procedures, and
political activities. Each party will submit its two (2) issues, and its alternatives to the other
party's issues, so that the voters will vote on four (4) distinct issues. Each voter will have the
option of voting for all of the issues of one party, or for some issues of one party and some of the
other. The issues submitted to the voters will appear on the ballot exactly as each respective
party would have them appear in the contract. The decision on each issue by a majority of the
voters voting on the issue at the referendum election shall be binding on the parties, subject to
the laws of Texas, and shall be adopted as part of the collective bargaining agreement. In the
absence of agreement of the parties to the contrary, the term of the provisions adopted by the
voters shall be the same as the term of the entire contract entered into by the parties, or, in
absence of such a contract, shall extend until the next July 31 following the election or until a
new contract is agreed upon. The Association shall pay the cost of printing the ballots. All other
costs of the elections shall be paid by the City. The place of the respective parties on the ballot
shall be determined by coin flip.

An impasse referendum can be canceled at any time up to fifteen (15) calendar days prior
to the election date by agreement of the parties.

The Association and the City agree that during the term of Article 16, no request shall be
made for submission of unresolved issues to arbitration under Chapter 174 or any other statute,
charter or ordinance provision, and that any such request shall be void and ineffective.

Any provision of this Article 16 may be amended by written agreement of the parties.

If the impasse procedures established herein shall be held invalid by the courts, all other

provisions of this Article 16 shall become ineffective, unless the parties agree in writing to
continue them in effect.

ARTICLE 16 - POLITICAL ACTIVITIES

The City may prohibit police officers from taking an active part in any political campaign
of another for an elective position of the city if they are in uniform or on active duty.

ARTICLE 17 - EXISTING CONDITIONS
No employee shall be unfavorably affected by the signing of this agreement as to wages,

hours, or other conditions of employment that he now enjoys, except as otherwise provided in
this agreement.
ARTICLE 18 - CLOSING CLAUSES

A. The effective date of this agreement shall be the 1° day of August, 2015 except as
otherwise provided herein, and the agreement shall remain in effect until 11:59 p.m. on
September 30, 2019 and thereafter until superseded by a new agreement, whichever occurs later
provided however, that in no event shall this Agreement continue in effect after September 30,
2022.

B. This document constitutes the sole and complete agreement between the parties. During
the term of the Contract neither party shall be obligated to bargain collectively with the other
with respect to any subject; provided, this provision does not affect any obligation which may
exist to negotiate a successor contract effective after the expiration of this document. The
impasse procedure in Article 16 of this agreement shall be wholly inapplicable to any matter
except impasse of a successful contract.

C. The provisions of this contract shall take precedence over all State and local Civil Service
provisions which are in conflict herewith, including for example and not by way of limitation,
any contrary provisions of Chapter 141,142 and 143; City Charter of the City of Corpus Christi,
Texas; ordinances of the City; Rules and Regulations of the Firefighters' and Police Officers’
Civil Service Commission; and Rules and Orders of the Police Department of the City.

D. If any article or section of this agreement should be found invalid, unlawful or
unenforceable by reason of any existing or subsequent enacted legislation or by judicial
authority, all other articles and sections of this agreement shall remain in full force and effect for
the duration of this agreement.

E, Both the City and the Association have relied upon their factual and legal understanding
that the City is currently in compliance with state and federal law in the payment of straight time
and overtime compensation in bargaining the wages and economic benefits under this agreement.
Fiscal certainty is of the essence of this agreement to the City. In the event of any adverse
judicial or agency determination finding that the City owes straight time or overtime
compensation under state or federal law above that paid under past practices reflected by the
City’s payroll records, the City may request in writing that the parties collectively bargain in
good faith for the limited purpose of resolving the impact of any adverse ruling.
ewe wee Be H G& fa

 

es

    
     

FOR THE CITY OF CORPUS CHRISTI, CORPUS CHRISTI POLICE
TEXAS: OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION
pate TNS

President CCPOA

CCPOA Negotiating Team Members:

 

 

 

L6 he
Lo EA
(EAL
CLV

 

 

ATTEST:
City Secretary

APPROVED:

IGu, Day of Se at Raber , 2015

; S—O7F aurwuris
si : HY Cduae: WS
City Attomey seer ate “seegaaho

[Page 63
APPENDIX "A"
DUES DEDUCTION AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AUTHORIZATION
CORPUS CHRISTI POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION

Dues Title
Code Payroll No. Employee No. Code No.
Social
Name Security No.
(Last) (First) (M.1)
Address Zip Code

 

I hereby authorize the City of Corpus Christi to deduct each pay period a sum as
certified by the Corpus Christi Police Officers’ Association as the current rate of dues or an
amount as may hereafter be established by the Corpus Christi Police Officers’ Association as
dues, or special assessment approved in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement and
Association Constitution and Bylaws. This deduction is to be forwarded directly to the Corpus
Christi Police Officers' Association. The authorization of this deduction is entirely voluntary on

my part.

I understand that the City of Corpus Christi will be obligated to forward to the
Association only those sums actually deducted and will not be liable for damages to me for

failure to deduct any authorized sum for any reason.

Signed Date
APPENDIX "B"
TERMINATION OF DUES DEDUCTION
ON SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AUTHORIZATION

CORPUS CHRISTI POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION

Dues Title
Code Payroll No. Employee No. Code No.
Social
Name Security No.
(Last) (First) (M.1.)
Address Zip Code

 

1 hereby terminate the authorization previously executed by me on

for dues deduction for the Corpus Christi Police Officers'

Association and request that the City make no further deductions under said authorization. This

termination of dues deduction is entirely voluntary on my part and | understand that the City of

Corpus Christi will not be liable for failure to promptly effectuate this termination for any
reason,

Signed

Date:
APPENDIX “C”
GRIEVANCE FORM

City of Corpus Christi Grievance No.

Employee: Immediate Supervisor:
Printed name: Printed Name:

Grievance must be filed within thirty (30) calendar days of its occurrence or knowledge of

occurrence. Any grievance not submitted within thirty (30) calendar days shall not be considered
timely and shall be void.

Date of Occurrence or Knowledge of Occurrence:

Date Grievance Submitted to the Association:

 

 

Step 1

Association Review (Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the grievance, the Association
shall determine whether the grievance is valid and notify the Chief of police in writing pursuant to
Step 2.)

The written grievance at Step 2 and at all steps thereafter shall contain the following information: (1) a
statement of the grievance setting out the specific provision of this agreement to be interpreted, applied or
enforced and the facts upon which it is based; (2) how the facts result in a violation of the agreement; (3)
the remedy or adjustment sought including a clear statement of the proper interpretation, application or
enforcement of this agreement; and (4) the signature of the aggrieved employee,

Statement of Facts:
Policy, Practice, or Contract Provision alleged to be violated:

Other Individuals affected by Grievance:

Remedy Sought:

Grievance sent to Chief of Police this. ,201__, at a.m./p.m.
Date Time

Grievance received by Chief/Staff Member this ,201__, at a.m./p.m.
Date Time

Signature of Chief or Staff Member

[Page 66
Step 2

Chief of Police Review (The Chief of Police shall respond in writing to this grievance within
sixty (60) calendar days of its receipt. If the Chief of Police does not respond within sixty
(60) calendar days, the grievance shall be deemed denied and the Association may proceed
to the next step.)

The written response at this step, and management responses at all steps thereafter, shall contain
the following information: (1) an affirmation or denial of the facts upon which the grievance is
based; (2) an analysis of the alleged violation of the agreement; (3) the remedy or adjustment, if
any, to be made; (4) the signature of the appropriate management representative.

See Attached Response.
Submitted by Chief of Police this .201__,at a.m. /p.m.
Date Time
Signature of Chief
Grievance Committee Representative received response this ,201__, at a.m. /p.m.
Date Time

 

Signature of Grievance Committee Representative

[Page 67
Step 3

City Manager Review (The Association may submit a written grievance from Step 2 to the
City Manager within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the Chief of Police’s written
response. The City Manager shall respond in writing to this grievance within thirty (30)
calendar days of its receipt. If the City Manager does not respond within thirty (30)
calendar days, the grievance shall be denied and the Association may proceed to the next

step.)

Grievance Sent To City Manager this
Date

City Manager received Grievance this

 

Signature of City Manager or Staff Member

See Attached Response.

Submitted by City Manager this.

Received by Grievance Committee Representative this,

 

Signature of Grievance Committee Representative

,201__, at a.m. / p.m.
Time

»201__,at a.m, /p.m.

Time
,201_,at___—a.m./ p.m.
Time
,201__,at a.m. /p.m.
Date Time
